serious charge tried in our criminal courts. You've heard a long and complex case, gentlemen, and it is now your duty to sit down to try and separate the facts from the fancy. One man is dead. The life of another is at stake. If there is a reasonable doubt in your minds as to the guilt of the accused . . . then you must declare him not guilty. If, however, there is no reasonable doubt, then he must be found guilty. Whichever way you decide, the verdict must be unanimous. I urge you to deliberate honestly and thoughtfully. You are faced with a grave responsibility. Thank you, gentlemen.

think they'd at least air condition the place. I almost dropped dead in court.

want, I'm right outside. Just knock.

think? 

Now we get a close shot of 

talk. Did you ever hear so much talk about nothing?

system. Well, I suppose you can't say anything against it.

you ever hear a phonier story? 

you're dealing with. 

Year Itch tonight. I must be the only guy in the whole world who hasn't seen it yet. Okay, your honor, start the show.

The gentleman at the window. 

father. Bing! Just like that. Well, it's the element. They let the kids run wild. Maybe it serves ‘em right.

Is everybody here? 

want to. I mean, I'm not going to make any rules. If we want to discuss it first and then vote, that's one way. Or we can vote right now to see how we stand.

Okay, all those voting guilty raise your hands.

Not guilty? One. Right. Okay. Eleven to one, guilty. Now we know where we are.

he's not guilty? 

and heard the same thing I did. The man's a dangerous killer. You could see it. 

the chest. An innocent little nineteen-year old kid. They proved it a dozen different ways. Do you want me to list them? 

guilty for?

to raise my hand and send a boy off to die without talking about it first.

You couldn't change my mind if you talked for a hundred years.

while. Look, this boy's been kicked around all his life. You know, living in a slum, his mother dead since he was nine. That's not a very good head start. He's a tough, angry kid. You know why slum kids get that way? Because we knock 'em on the head once a day, every day. I think maybe we owe him a few words. That's all.

thing. He got a fair trial, didn't he? You know what that trial cost? He's lucky he got it. Look, we're all grownups here. You're not going to tell us that we're supposed to believe him, knowing what he is. I've lived among 'em all my life. You can't believe a word they say. You know that.

thing for a man to believe! Since when is dishonesty a group characteristic? You have no monopoly on the truth.

All right. It's not Sunday. We don't need a sermon.

to be able to behave like gentlemen. 

it. 

close the window. It was blowing on my neck. 

it seems to me that it's up to us to convince this gentleman (indicating NO. 8) that we're right and he's wrong. Maybe if we each took a minute or two, you know, if we sort of try it on for size.

table. 

guilty. I thought it was obvious. I mean nobody proved otherwise.

is on the prosecution. The defendant doesn't have to open his mouth. That's in the Constitution. The Fifth Amendment. You've heard of it. 

I . . . what I meant . . . well, anyway, I think he was guilty. 

man who lived on the second floor right underneath the room where the murder took place. At ten minutes after twelve on the night of the killing he heard loud noises in the upstairs apartment. He said it sounded like a fight. Then he heard the kid say to his father, "I'm gonna kill you.!” A second later he heard a body falling, and he ran to the door of his apartment, looked out, and saw the kid running down the stairs and out of the house. Then he called the police. They found the father with a knife in his chest. 

movies. That's a little ridiculous, isn't it? He couldn't even remember what pictures he saw. 

right. 

testimony don't prove it, then nothing does. 

can't sleep. It's hot, you know. Anyway, she looks out the window and right across the street she sees the kid stick the knife into his father. She's known the kid all his life. His window is right opposite hers, across the el tracks, and she swore she saw him do it.

windows of a passing el train at night and see what's happening on the other side. They proved it.

She's one of "them" too, isn't she: I'd like to ask you something. How come you believed her? She's one of "them" too, isn't she?

you letting him get you all upset for? Relax.

with the testimony from those people across the hall. Didn't they say something about an argument between the father and the boy around seven o'clock that night? I mean, I can be wrong.

boy twice and then saw the boy walk angrily out of the house. What does that prove?

the picture. I didn't say it proved anything. 

day about this thing, but I think we’re wasting our time. Look at the kid's record. At fifteen he was in reform school. He stole a car. He's been arrested for mugging. He was picked up for knife-fighting. I think they said he stabbed somebody in the arm. This is a very fine boy.

regularly. He used his fists. 

don't listen. I've got a kid. When he was eight years old, he ran away from a fight. I saw him. I was so ashamed, I told him right out, "I'm gonna make a man out of you or I'm gonna bust you up into little pieces trying." When he was fifteen he hit me in the face. He's big, you know. I haven't seen him in three years. Rotten kid! You work your heart out.... All right, let's get on with it. 

don't listen. (Bitter) I've got a kid. When he was eight years old, he ran away from a fight. I saw him. I was so ashamed, I told him right out, "I'm gonna make a man out of you or I'm gonna bust you up into little pieces trying." When he was fifteen he hit me in the face. He's big, you know. I haven't seen him in three years. Rotten kid! You work your heart out.... All right, let's get on with it.

product of a filthy neighborhood and a broken home. We can't help that. We're not here to go into the reasons why slums are breeding grounds for criminals. They are. I know it. So do you. The children who come out of slum backgrounds are potential menaces to society.

me.

Maybe it still smells on me. 

Let's not be so sensitive. 

It's your turn. 

I felt that the defense counsel never really conducted a thorough cross-examination. I mean, he was appointed by the court to defend the boy. He hardly seemed interested. Too many questions were left unasked. 

What about the ones that were asked? For instance, let's talk about that cute little switchknife. You know, the one that fine, upright kid admitted buying.

at it. I'd like to see it again, Mr. Foreman.

look at it again. What do yo: We all know what it looks like. I don't see why we have to look at it again. What do you think? 

don't you agree? 

being slapped by his father.

switch knife. The storekeeper was arrested the following day when he admitted selling it to the boy. It's a very unusual knife. The storekeeper identified it and said it was the only one of its kind he had in stock. Why did the boy get it? As a present for a friend of his, he says. Am I right so far?

what he's talking about. 

fallen through a hole in his coat pocket, that he never saw it again. Now there's a story, gentlemen. You know what actually happened. The boy took the knife home and a few hours later stabbed his father with it and even remembered to wipe off the fingerprints.

are you trying to tell me that someone picked it up off the street and went up to the boy's house and stabbed his father with it just to be amusing?

and that someone else stabbed his father with a similar knife. It's possible.

never seen one like it before in my life and neither had the storekeeper who sold it to him.

coincidence? 

possible. 

from the boy's house. It cost two dollars. 

proved absolutely zero. Maybe there are ten knives like that, so what?

there are still eleven of us who think he's guilty. You're alone. What do you think you're gonna accomplish? If you want to be stubborn and hang this jury, he'll be tried again and found guilty, sure as he's born. 

you like him? Like someone forced him! 

sit around a jury room. 

at once? 

the show. 

 secret ballot. I'll abstain. If there are still eleven votes for guilty, I won't stand alone. We'll take in a guilty verdict right now. 

Guilty. Guilty. 

Not Guilty. Guilty.

point, no? If the gentleman wants it to remain secret…

What do you mean? There are no secrets in here! I know who it was. What's the matter with you? You come in here and you vote guilty and then this slick preacher starts to tear your heart out with stories about a poor little kid who just couldn't help becoming a murderer. So you change your vote. If that isn't the most sickening...

where he belongs—and all of a sudden we're paying attention to fairy tales. 

thought that a man was entitled to have unpopular opinions in this country. This is the reason I came here. I wanted to have the right to disagree. In my own country, I am ashamed to say that. 

country? 

you what made you change your vote.

change his vote. 

I did. Maybe you'd like to know why. 

alone against us. That's his right. It takes a great deal of courage to stand alone even if you believe in something very strongly. He left the verdict up to us. He gambled for support, and I gave it to him. I want to hear more. The vote is ten to two. Thank you. This gentleman chose to stand alone against us. That's his right. It takes a great deal of courage to stand alone even if you believe in something very strongly. He left the verdict up to us. He gambled for support, and I gave it to him. I want to hear more. The vote is ten to two.

Look, buddy, I was a little excited. Well, you know how it is. I . . . I didn't mean to get nasty…nothing personal.

didn't kill him, who did? 

boy on trial is guilty. We're not concerned with anyone else's motives here. 

to remember. 

explain what your reasonable doubts are. 

feeling. Perhaps you don't understand. 

about your feelings? What about the facts? 

kid yell, "I'm gonna kill you." A second later he heard the father's body falling, and he saw the boy running out of the house fifteen seconds after that.

street. She looked into the open window and saw the boy stab his father. She saw it. Now if that's not enough for you.... 

elevated train. The train had five cars, and she saw it through the windows of the last two. She remembers the most insignificant details.

pencil. ~ 

one! 

an elevated train going at top speed to pass a given point? 

given point is the window of the room in which the killing took place. You can almost reach out of the window of that room and touch the el. Right? All right. Now let me ask you this. Did anyone here ever live right next to the el tracks? I have. When your window is open and the train goes by, the noise is almost unbearable. You can't hear yourself think. : This. An el train passes a given point in ten seconds. That given point is the window of the room in which the killing took place. You can almost reach out of the window of that room and touch the el. Right? All right. Now let me ask you this. Did anyone here ever live right next to the el tracks? I have. When your window is open and the train goes by, the noise is almost unbearable. You can't hear yourself think.

point?

one second later he heard a body fall. One second. That's the testimony, right? 

last two cars of the el and saw the body fall. Right? The last two cars. 

per car. That el had been going by the old man's window for at least six seconds and maybe more, before the body fell, according to the woman. The old man would have had to hear the boy say, "I'm going to kill you," while the front of the el was roaring past his nose. It's not possible that he could nave heard it.

man a liar? 

send one in to a newspaper? They pay two dollars. 

be heard.

of his jacket was split under the arm. Did you notice that? He was a very old man with a torn jacket, and he carried two canes. I think I know him better than anyone here. This is a quiet, frightened, insignificant man who has been nothing all his life, who has never had recognition—his name in the newspapers. Nobody knows him after seventy-five years. That's a very sad thing. A man like this needs to be recognized. To be questioned, and listened to, and quoted just once. This is very important. 

: It's just that I looked at him for a very long time. The seam of his jacket was split under the arm. Did you notice that? He was a very old man with a torn jacket, and he carried two canes. I think I know him better than anyone here. This is a quiet, frightened, insignificant man who has been nothing all his life, who has never had recognition—his name in the newspapers. Nobody knows him after seventy-five years. That's a very sad thing. A man like this needs to be recognized. To be questioned, and listened to, and quoted just once. This is very important.

just so that he could be important?

believe that he heard those words and recognized the boy's face. 

heard. How can you make up a thing like that? What do you know about it? 

Thanks. 

think we proved that the old man couldn't have heard the boy say, "I'm going to kill you," but supposing he really did hear it? This phrase: how many times has each of you used it? Probably hundreds. "If you do that once more, Junior, I'm going to murder you." "Come on, Rocky, kill him!" We say it every day. This doesn't mean that we're going to kill someone. ~

the kid screamed it out at the top of his lungs. Don't try and tell me he didn't mean it. Anybody says a thing like that the way he said it—they mean it.

shout out a thing like that so the whole neighborhood would hear it? I don't think so. He's much too bright for that.

even speak good English!

my vote to not guilty.

Yes. I'm sure. 

on? Stories this guy made up! He oughta write for American Detective Monthly. He'd make a fortune. Listen, the kid had a lawyer, didn't he? Why didn't his lawyer bring up all these points?

of thin air. Now, we're supposed to believe that the old man didn't get up out of bed, run to the door, and see the kid beat it downstairs fifteen seconds after the killing. He's only saying he did to be important?

run.

enough, isn't it?

Don't you remember that?
the apartment.

everything straight?

only one in the room who wants to see exhibits all the time? 

about where the body was found....

strokes in the past three years, and wh: We're not. We're going to find out how a man who's had two strokes in the past three years, and who walks with a pair of canes, could get to his front door in fifteen seconds.

that kind of a thing.

confused. How could he be positive about anything?

killing took place. The old man's apartment is directly beneath it and exactly the same. (Pointing) Here are the el tracks. The bedroom. Another bedroom. Living room. Bathroom. Kitchen. And this is the hall. Here’s the front door to the apartment. And here are the steps. Now, the old man was in bed in this room. He says he got up, went out into the hall, down the hall to the front door, opened it, and looked out just in time to see the boy racing down the stairs. Am I right?

from his bed to the bedroom door. The length of the hall is forty-three feet, six inches. He had to get up out of bed, get his canes, walk twelve feet, open the bedroom door, walk forty-three feet, and open the front door—all in fifteen seconds. Do you think this possible? 

: His bed was at the window. It's (looking closer) twelve feet from his bed to the bedroom door. The length of the hall is forty-three feet, six inches. He had to get up out of bed, get his canes, walk twelve feet, open the bedroom door, walk forty-three feet, and open the front door—all in fifteen seconds. Do you think this possible?

witness chair.

going to pace off twelve feet—the length of the bedroom. 

It's a ridiculous waste of time. 

This is the bedroom door. Now how far would you say it is from here to the door of this room? 

and back is about forty feet. It's shorter than the length of the hall, wouldn't you say that? 

can recreate a thing like that? 

fifteen seconds. We can spare that. Who's got a watch with a second hand' 

body falling. Time me from there. Let's say, he keeps his canes right at his bedside. Right? 

in the courtroom. 

heard someone racing down the stairs, and assumed that it was the boy.

all kinds of dishonesty in my day .. but this little display takes the cake. Tell him, will you?

about slum kids and injustice and you make up these wild stories, and you've got some softhearted old ladies listening to you. Well, I'm not. I'm getting real sick of it. (To all) What's the matter with you people? This kid is guilty! He's got to burn! We're letting him slip through our fingers here.

pull the switch. 

want it—not because of the facts. 

You can take that back. We're finished with it.

thing about democracy. That we are…ummmm… what is the word…Ah, notified! That we are notified by mail to come down to this place and decide on the guilt or innocence of a man we have not known before. We have nothing to gain or lose by our verdict. This is one of the reasons why we are strong. We should not make it a personal thing. 

: Nor do 1. We have a responsibility. This is a remarkable thing about democracy. That we are…ummmm… what is the word…Ah, notified! That we are notified by mail to come down to this place and decide on the guilt or innocence of a man we have not known before. We have nothing to gain or lose by our verdict. This is one of the reasons why we are strong. We should not make it a personal thing.

know who stands where. 

I’ll call off your jury numbers. 

(mad) I’ll tell you something. The crime is being committed right in this room. 

jury. There's no point in this going on any more. 

kid take his chances with twelve other guys. 

reasonable doubt? 

"reasonable doubt.” 

think you are to talk to me like that? How do you like this guy? He comes over here running for his life, and before he can even take a big breath he's telling us how to run the show. The arrogance of him! 

you came from.

doesn't answer but looks away.) Maybe it wouldn't hurt us to take a few tips from people who come running here! Maybe they learned something we don't know. We're not so perfect!

constructive to say? 

. this whole business about the stab wound and how it was made, the downward angle of it, you know? 

over it in court. 

feet eight inches tall. His father was six two. That's a difference of six inches. It's a very awkward thing to stab down into the chest of someone who's half a foot taller than you are.

I'm going to give you a demonstration. Somebody get up.

it again. Is that six inches?

in. That's how I'd stab a taller man in the chest, and that's how it was done. Take a look at it and tell me I'm wrong. 

experienced knife fighter. He was even sent to reform school for knifing someone, isn't that so?

changes the position of the knife so that he can stab over-handed.) Doesn't it seem like an awkward way to handle a knife? 

street, too many of them. Switch knives came with the neighborhood where I lived. Funny I didn't think of it before. I guess you try to forget those things. Anyone who's ever used a switch knife would never have stabbed downward. You don't handle a switch knife that way. You use it underhanded.

his father: Then he couldn't have made the kind of wound, which killed his father. 

with switch knives. 

whole thing already. We're getting nowhere fast. Let's break it up and go home. I'm changing my vote to not guilty. 

answer. (To NO.7) What kind of a man are you? You have sat here and voted guilty with everyone else because there are some theater tickets burning a hole in your pocket. Now you have changed your vote for the same reason. I do not think you have the right to play like this with a man's life. This is an ugly and terrible thing to do.

not guilty, then do it because you are convinced the man is not guilty. If you believe he is guilty, then vote that way. Or don't you have the . . . the . . . guts—the guts to do what you think is right?

I don't have to

You have to! Say it! Why?

way is a show of hands. Anybody object? (No one does.) All right. All those voting not guilty, raise your hands. 

: Okay, there's another vote called for. I guess the quickest way is a show of hands. Anybody object? (No one does.) All right. All those voting not guilty, raise your hands.

in favor of acquittal.

is innocent? Look, you know how those people lie. l don't have to tell you. They don't know what the truth is. And lemme tell you, they— don't need any real big reason to kill someone either. You know, they get drunk, and bang, someone's lying in the gutter. Nobody's blaming them. That's how they are. You know what I mean? Violent!

where are you going? Look, these people are drinking and fighting all the time, and if somebody gets killed, so somebody gets killed. They don't care. 

Oh, sure, there are some good things about them, too. Look, I'm the first to say that.

exception. Most of them; it's like they have no feelings. They can do anything. What's going on here?

There's not a one of ‘em who's any good. We better watch out. Take it from me. This kid on trial.... 

doing? I'm trying to tell you something....

split your skull.

tell you why. To me, the most damning evidence was given by the woman across the street who claimed she actually saw the murder committed. 

important testimony. 

say? 

to bed at about eleven o'clock that night. Her bed was next to the open window, and she could look out of the window while lying down and see directly into the window across the street. She tossed and turned for over an hour, unable to fall asleep. Finally she turned toward the window at about twelve ten and as she looked out, she saw the boy stab his father. As far as I can see, this is unshakable testimony.

acquittal. What do you think about it? 

out all the other evidence. 

it in the morning. I've got a kid with mumps. 

glasses? 

do you do when you wake up at night and want to know what time it is? 

she saw the killing wears glasses. 

eyeglasses to bed, would she? 

remember. 

remember this very clearly. They looked quite strong. 

testified that in the midst of her tossing and turning she rolled over and looked casually out the window. The murder was taking place as she looked out, and the lights went out a split second later. She couldn't have had time to put on her glasses. Now maybe she honestly thought she saw the boy kill his father. I say that she saw only a blur.

want? 

have time.

guy. You made all the arguments. You can't turn now. A guilty man's gonna be walking the streets. A murderer. He's got to die! Stay with me. 

I'm entitled to my opinion! It's gonna be a hung jury! That's it! 

night, maybe in a few months, you'll get some sleep. 
============================================================
Oh my God, I got the most fucked up thing I been meanin' to tell you.

Oh Jesus. Here we go.

You guys know my cousin Mikey Sullivan?

Yeah.

Well you know how he loves animals right? Anyway, last week he's drivin' home...

What? Come on!

I'm sorry, 'cause you know Mikey, the fuckin guy loves animals, and this is the last person you'd want this to happen to.

Chuckie, what the fuck happened? 

Okay. He's driving along and this fuckin' cat jumps in front of his car, and so he hits this cat--

That isn't funny--

and he's like "shit! Motherfucker!" And he looks in his rearview and sees this cat -- I'm sorry--

Fuckin' Chuckie!

So he sees this cat tryin to make it across the street and it's not lookin' so good.

It's walkin' pretty slow at this point.

You guys are fuckin' sick.

So Mikey's like "Fuck, I gotta put this thing out of its misery"--So he gets a hammer--

out of his tool box, and starts chasin' the cat and starts whackin' it with the hammer. You know, tryin' to put the thing out of its misery.

Jesus.

And all the time he's apologizin' to the cat, goin' "I'm sorry." BANG, "I'm sorry." BANG!

Like it can understand.

And this Samoan guy comes runnin' out of his house and he's like "What the fuck are you doing to my cat?!" Mikey's like "I'm sorry" --BANG--" I hit your cat with my truck, and I'm just trying to put it out of it's misery" -- BANG! And the cat dies. So Mikey's like "Why don't you come look at the front of the truck." 'Cause the other guy's all fuckin flipped out about--

Watching his cat get brained.

Yeah, so he's like "Check the front of my truck, I can prove I hit it 'cause there's probably some blood or something"--

--or a tail--

And so they go around to the front of his truck... and there's another cat on the grille.

Is that unbelievable? He brained an innocent cat!

Please finish McKinley by next month.

Many of you probably had this as undergraduates in real analysis. It won't hurt to brush up. I am also putting an advanced fourier system on the main hallway chalkboard--

I'm hoping that one of you might prove it by the end of the semester. The first person to do so will not only be in my good graces, but go on to fame and fortune by having their accomplishment recorded and their name printed in the auspicious "M.I.T. Tech."

Former winners include Nobel Laureates, world renowned astro- physicists, Field's Medal winners and lowly M.I.T. professors.

Okay. That is all.

You're gonna get charged!

You think I'm afraid of you, you big fuck? You're crowdin' the plate.

Stop brushin' me back!

Stop crowdin the plate!

Casey's bouncin' at a bar up Harvard. We should go there sometime.

What are we gonna do up there?

I don't know, we'll fuck up some smart kids.   (stepping back in) You'd prob'ly fit right in.

Fuck you.

Excuse me, Professor Lambeau?

Yes.

I'm in your applied theories class. We're all down at the Math and Science building.

It's Saturday.

I know. We just couldn't wait 'till Monday to find out.

Find out what?

Who proved the theorem.

Yah, that is a nice ass.

You could put a pool in that backyard.

Who's she talking to?

That fuckin' guinea, Will knows him.

Yah, Bobby Champa. He used to beat the shit outta' me in Kindergarten.

He's a pretty big kid.

Yah, he's the same size now as he was in Kindergarten.

Fuck this, let's get something to eat...

What Morgan, you're not gonna go talk to her?

Fuck her.

I could go for a Whopper.

Let's hit "Kelly's."

Morgan, I'm not goin' to "Kelly's Roast Beef" just cause you like the take-out girl. It's fifteen minutes out of our way.

What else we gonna do we can't spare fifteen minutes?

All right Morgan, fine. I'll tell you why we're not going to "Kelly's." It's because the take-out bitch is a fuckin' idiot. I'm sorry you like her but she's dumb as a post and she has never got our order right, never once.

She's not stupid.

She's sharp as a marble.

We're not goin'.   (beat) I don't even like "Kelly's."

This is correct? Who did this?

Nemesh?

No way.

Well, whoever You are, I'm sure you'll find this one challenging enough to merit coming forward with your identity. That is, if you can do it.

Double Burger.

Double Burger.

I, I had a Kelly's Double Burger.

Would you shut the fuck up! I know what you ordered, I was there!
 
So why don't you give me my sandwich?

What do you mean "your sandwich?" I bought it.

Yah, all right...

How much money you got?

I told you, I just got change.

Well give me your fuckin' change and we'll put your fuckin' sandwich on layaway.

Why you gotta be an asshole Chuckie?

I think you should establish a good line of credit.

Oh motherfucker...

She didn't do it again did she?

Jesus Christ. Not even close.

Did she get my Double Burger?

NO SHE DIDN'T GET YOUR DOUBLE BURGER!! IT'S ALL FUCKIN' FLYIN' FISH FILET!!

Jesus, that's really bad, did anyone even order a Flyin' Fish?

No, and we got four of 'em.

You gotta' be kiddin' me. Why do we even go to her?

Cause fuckin' Morgan's got a crush on her, we always go there and when we get to the window he never says a fuckin' word to her, he never even gets out of the car, and she never gets our order right cause she's the goddamn MISSING LINK!

Well, she out did herself today...

I don't got a crush on her.

What do we got?

I don't know yet.

Come on, Will...

Shut up.

No, why didn't you fight him at the park if you wanted to? I'm not goin' now, I'm eatin' my snack.

So don't go.

Morgan, Let's go.

I'm serious Chuckie, I ain't goin'.

You're goin'. And if you're not out there in two fuckin' seconds, when I'm done with them you're next!

Hey, Bobby Champa! I went to Kindergarten with you right? Sister Margaret's class...

Hey, thanks for comin' out.

Yeah, you're all invited over to Morgan's house for a complementary fish sandwich.

Hey, I know it's not a French cruller, but it's free.

Get the fuck off me!

Sean?

Sean? You okay?

Yeah. A beat.

It's getting cold.

When's the arraignment?

Next week.

Is it my imagination, or has my class grown considerably?

I look around and see young people who are my students, young people who are not my students as well as some of my colleagues. And by no stretch of my imagination do I think you've all come to hear me lecture.

But rather to ascertain the identity of who our esteemed "The Tech" has come to call "The Mystery Math Magician."

Whoever you are, you've solved four of the most difficult theorems I've ever given a class. So without further ado, come forward silent rogue, and receive thy prize.

Well, I'm sorry to disappoint my spectators, but it appears there will be no unmasking here today. I'm going to have to ask those of you not enrolled in the class to make your escape now or, for the next three hours be subjected to the mundities of eigenvectors.

However, my colleagues and I have conferred. There is a problem on the board, right now, that took us two years to prove. So let this be said; the gauntlet has been thrown down. But the faculty have answered the challenge and answered with vigor.

Excuse me!

Oh, I'm sorry.

What're you doing?

I'm sorry.

What's your name? Don't you walk away from me. This is people's work, you can't graffiti here.

Hey fuck you.

Well... I'll be speaking to your supervisor.

My God.

What happened?   (beat) You got fired, huh?

Yeah, Morgan. I got fired.

How fuckin' retarded do you have to be to get shit-canned from that job? How hard is it to push a fuckin' broom?

You got fired from pushing a broom, you little bitch.

Yah, that was different. Management was restructurin'--

Yah, restructurin' the amount of retards they had workin' for them.

Fuck you, you fat fuck.

Least I work for a livin'.   (to Will) Why'd you get fired?

Management was restructurin'.

What the fuck? I just asked you for a job yesterday!

I told you "no" yesterday!

What's up Case.

So, this is a Harvard bar, huh? I thought there'd be equations and shit on the wall.

Hey, how's it goin'?

Fine.

Okay.

So, you ladies ah, go to school here?

Yes.

Yeah, cause I think I had a class with you.

What class?

Ah, history I think.

Oh...

Yah, it's not a bad school...

What class did you say that was?

History.

How'd you like that course?

Good, it was all right.

History? Just "history?" It must have been a survey course then.

Pretty broad. "History of the World?"

Hey, come on pal we're in classes all day. That's one thing about Harvard never seizes to amaze me, everybody's talkin' about school all the time.

Hey, I'm the last guy to want to talk about school at the bar. But as long as you're here I want to "seize" the opportunity to ask you a question.

Oh, I'm sure you covered it in your history class.

To tell you the truth, I wasn't there much. The class was rather elementary.

Elementary? Oh, I don't doubt that it was. I remember the class, it was just between recess and lunch.

All right, are we gonna have a problem?

There's no problem. I was just hoping you could give me some insight into the evolution of the market economy in the early colonies. My contention is that prior to the Revolutionary War the economic modalities especially of the southern colonies could most aptly be characterized as agrarian precapitalist and...

Of course that's your contention. You're a first year grad student. You just finished some Marxian historian, Pete Garrison prob'ly, and so naturally that's what you believe until next month when you get to James Lemon and get convinced that Virginia and Pennsylvania were strongly entrepreneurial and capitalist back in 1740. That'll last until sometime in your second year, then you'll be in here regurgitating Gordon Wood about the Pre-revolutionary utopia and the capital-forming effects of military mobilization.

Well, as a matter of fact, I won't, because Wood drastically underestimates the impact of--

"Wood drastically underestimates the impact of social distinctions predicated upon wealth, especially inherited wealth..." You got that from "Work in Essex County," Page 421, right? Do you have any thoughts of your own on the subject or were you just gonna plagiarize the whole book for me?

Look, don't try to pass yourself off as some kind of an intellect at the expense of my friend just to impress these girls.

The sad thing is, in about 50 years you might start doin' some thinkin' on your own and by then you'll realize there are only two certainties in life.

Yeah? What're those?

One, don't do that. Two -- you dropped a hundred and fifty grand on an education you coulda' picked up for a dollar fifty in late charges at the Public Library.

But I will have a degree, and you'll be serving my kids fries at a drive through on our way to a skiing trip.

Maybe. But at least I won't be a prick.   (beat) And if you got a problem with that, I guess we can step outside and deal with it that way.

If you change your mind, I'll be over by the bar.

My boy's wicked smart.

You suck.

What?

I've been sitting over there for forty-five minutes waiting for you to come talk to me. But I'm just tired now and I have to go home and I wasn't going to keep sitting there waiting for you.

I'm Will.

Skylar. And by the way. That guy over there is a real dick and I just wanted you to know he didn't come with us.

I kind of got that impression.

Well, look, I have to go. Gotta' get up early and waste some more money on my overpriced education.

I didn't mean you. Listen, maybe...

Here's my number.

Maybe we could go out for coffee sometime?

Great, or maybe we could go somewhere and just eat a bunch of caramels.

What?

When you think about it, it's just as arbitrary as drinking coffee.

Okay, sounds good.

Five minutes.

What?

I was trying to be smooth.   (indicates clock) But at twelve-fifteen I was gonna come over there and talk to you.

See, it's my life story. Five more minutes and I would have got to hear your best pick-up line.

The caramel thing is my pick-up line.

There goes that fuckin' Barney right now, with his fuckin' "skiin' trip." We should'a kicked that dude's ass.

Hold up.

DO YOU LIKE APPLES?

DO YOU LIKE APPLES?!

Yeah?

WELL I GOT HER NUMBER! HOW DO YA LIKE THEM APPLES?!!

Excuse me. Is this the buildings and grounds office?

Yeah, can I help you?

I'm trying to find the name of a student who works here.

No students work for me.

Could you just check, because the young man who works in my building--

Which one's your building?

Building two.

Look, he got his job through his P.O. so you can call him.

There is a lengthy legal precedent, Your Honor, going back to 1789, whereby a defendant may claim self- defense against an agent of the government where the act is shown to be a defense against tyranny, a defense of liberty--

Mr. Simmons, Officer McNeely who signed the complaint isn't in my courtroom. Why is that?

He's in the hospital with a broken knee, Your Honor. But I have depositions from the other officers.

Henry Ward Beecher proclaimed, in his Proverbs From Plymouth Pulpit back in 1887, that "Every American citizen is by birth, a sworn officer of the state. Every man is a policeman." As for the other officers, even William Congrave said; "he that first cries out 'stop thief' is 'oft he that has stolen the treasure."

Your Honor--

I am afforded the right to speak in my own defense by our constitution, Sir. The same document which guarantees my right to liberty. "Liberty," in case you've forgotten, is "the soul's right to breathe, and when it cannot take a long breath laws are girded too tight. Without liberty, man is a syncope."   (beat, to Judge) Ibid. Your Honor.

Man is a what?

Julius Caesar proclaimed -- Though he be wounded-- "Magna..."

Son,   (a beat) My turn.

June, '93, assault, Sept. '93 assault... Grand theft auto February '94.

Where, apparently, you defended yourself and had the case thrown out by citing "free property rights of horse and carriage" from 1798...

March, '94 public drunkenness, public nudity, assault. 10/94 mayhem. November '94, assault. Jan. '95 impersonating a police officer, mayhem, theft, resisting -- overturned--

You're in my courtroom, now and I am aware of your priors.   (beat) I'm also aware that you're an orphan. You've been through several foster homes. The state removed you from three because of serious physical abuse.

Another Judge might care. You hit a cop, you go in.   (beat) Motion to dismiss denied.

Keep workin' on your arguments, son. A word of advice for trial; speak English.

Excuse me, your Honor.   (offers hand) Gerald Lambeau.

I'm a professor at M.I.T.   (beat) Combunatorial Mathematics.

Oh. Pleased to meet you.

Do you have a minute?

Hey, Skylar?

Yeah?

It's Will, the really funny good looking guy you met at the bar?

I'm sorry, I don't recall meeting anyone who fits that description.

Okay, you got me. It's the ugly, obnoxious, toothless loser who got drunk and wouldn't leave you alone all night.

Oh Will! I was wondering when you'd call.

Yeah, I figured maybe sometime this week we could go to a cafe and have some caramels.

Sounds good, where are you now?

You aren't, by any chance, Pre-law? Are you?

Hello. Gerald Lambeau, M.I.T.

Fuck do you want?

I've spoken with the judge and he's agreed to release you under my supervision.

Really?

Yes. Under two conditions.

What're those?

That you meet with me twice a week—   (a beat) and you meet with a therapist.

If I agree to this, I walk right now?

That's right.

I'll do the work. I'm not going to meet with a therapist.

Now, it won't be as bad as it sounds, Will.   (beat) I've already spoken to one therapist, his name is Henry Lipkin and he's a friend of mine. He's also published four books and is widely considered to be one of the brightest men in his field.   (beat) I'm sure it'll be better than spending the next six months in jail.

Submit, bitch! Submit! Submit!

Oh, Morgan!

What'd you get? You get leniency?

Probation, counselin', few days a week.

You're fuckin' good.

Just submit, Morgan. He's got you in the Cobra Clutch.

Fuck your mother too!

That's why I love stock-car racin'. That Dale Ernhart's real good.

Now you know Will, and I know, what you need to be doing. You have a gift.

I could work the pit maybe, but I could never drive like Dale Ernhart--

You have a quality -- something you were born with, that you have no control over -- and you are, in a sense, hiding that by becoming a janitor. And I'm not saying that's wrong. I'm friends with the janitor that works in my building. He's been to my house for dinner. As a matter of fact I did some free consultation for "Mike" -- that's not his real name. That's in my book.

Yeah, I read your book. "Mike" had the same problems as "Chad" the stockbroker.

Yes. The pressures you feel, and again, I am neither labeling nor judging them, are keeping you from fulfilling your potential -- you're in a rut. So stop the Tom Foolery -- the Shenanigan's, Will.

You're right. I know.

Will, your not getting off that easy.

No, but, I mean you know... I do other things. That no one knows about.

Like what, Will?

I go places, I interact.

What places?

Certain, clubs.   (beat) Like, Paradise. It's not bad.

It's just that feeling when you can take your shirt off and really dance.   (beat) When the music owns you. Do you understand?

I might understand that.

Do you find it hard to hide the fact that you're gay?

What?

C'mon, I read your book. I talked to you. It's just something I know to be true.

That's very presumptuous.

Buddy, two seconds ago you were ready to give me a jump.

Well, I'm sorry to disappoint you, but I'm married and I have two children.

I'm sure you do. You probably got a real nice house, nice car -- your book's a best seller.

You're getting defensive, Will.

Look, man. I don't care if you're putting from the rough. There are solid arguments that some of the greatest people in history were gay; Alexander the Great, Caesar, Shakespeare, Oscar Wilde, Napoleon, Gertrude Stein, not to mention Danny Terrio, not many straight men can dance like that.

Who is "Danny Terrio?"

If you wanna hit "Ramrod," take your shot. Take some pride in it. You go to church? So fuckin' what, God loves you. I mean, Christ. A guy as well known as you? By the time you put your disguise on and skulk out of the house Sunday nights you probably look like "Inspector Clouseau."

Well, I can see this is pointless...

You're getting defensive... Henry. And hey, chief -- tell the wife, at least. Christ, set her free.

Henry?

No. You know what, Gerry? This is why I don't do pro-bono anymore. It's not worth it to me.

What happened?

I don't have the time. I'm going on national television this week.

Wait a minute, Henry...

This rectangle is subdivided into rectangles. One edge of an inner rectangle is an integer. Can you prove that one edge of the larger rectangle is an integer?

Of course.

Okay. How?

It's an integer proof.

What? Hey, look buddy my time's almost up. You want me to sit here for an hour and write it out?

Look, I'll give you the key steps to it but I'm not gonna do the whole thing.

That would be a monumental waste of time, wouldn't it, Will?

I think so.

I happen to know so.

You're thinking too hard. What if I did this?

Now, what if I do this?

Have you ever played checkers?

You color-code it. Half-red, half- black. If that's an integer--

What's that?

Half-red, half-black--

that?

Half-red, half-black

That edge!

An integer.

It would appear we got that proof in under the wire after all. It's not how hard you look at things, young man, it's the way you look at them. If you take aim before you fire, you will find the most difficult problems become, quite literally, child's play.

Will, you've managed to offend four of my colleagues so much that they refused to come back. You're meeting with the leading hypnotist in the country next week and Tom and I plan to sit in on the sessions, so I expect you to behave appropriately.

Shall we start the, uh...

Yeah, when do I get my hypnosis? You guys been talkin' for twenty minutes.

Yes, Will. We'll get to that. But first, why don't you go to sleep for me.

Would you mind standing on one leg?

Okay, you're in your bed, Will. Now how old are you?

Seven.

And what do you see?

Somethin's in my room.

What is it?

It's like a small figure, hoverin' over me. Gettin' closer.

You're in a safe place, Will.

It's touching me.

Where is it touching you?

Down there.   (indicating genitals) And I'm nervous.

You don't have to be nervous, Will.

'Cause I'm not ready.   (calming) But the figure tells me everything's gonna be all right. 'Cause the figure's a Libra too. And we start dancin' and it's beautiful--

"SKY ROCKETS IN FLIGHT!"

Oh Jesus.

Wait a minute, Barry.

I have better ways to spend my time.

Oh, for God's sake, Will.

Oh, come on! You're not pinnin' this one on me. He left, I wanted to talk to him for another twenty minutes. I was havin' fun.

I told you to cooperate with these people.

C'mon, that guy was a fuckin' piece of work.

Look into my eyes. I don't need therapy.

Get out, Will.

Okay... don't forget to get another therapist for next week.

That's enough.

I called Mel Weintraub this morning, to check for availability.

What's the point?

What do you want to do?

There is somebody...

Who is he?

He was my roommate in college.

Establishing trust is the most important component in making breakthroughs with a patient. Why?

Maureen?

Keep up the good work, Maureen. Vinnie?

looks up.

Because trust is an important thing.

Don't bullshit me, Vinnie. Didn't your brother give you the notes? Okay. If a patient doesn't trust you then they won't feel safe enough to be honest with you -- then there's no point to them being in therapy. It's like saying -- "Fine, come here and don't tell me a thing but go home feeling like you're doing something about your problems -- and give me my fifty bucks before you leave will ya'!"

If you don't help them trust you -- then there's no way you'll ever get them to sleep with you. And that should be the goal of any good therapist. Insecure women, you know... nail 'em when they're vulnerable, that's always been my motto.

See, I got Vinnie's attention.

standing in the back of the room. There is an awkward moment.

Gerry.

Sean.

Well, it seems we're in the presence of greatness. Professor Gerald Lambeau is a Field's Medal winner. Combunatorial Mathematics. 1986.

Hello.

The Field's Medal is the Nobel Prize for math.   (beat) But it's only given out every four years.

Okay, that's all for today. Try and get through Fernald by Monday.

Good to see you.

Good to see you.

Is there someplace we can talk?

I don't know, it was just kind of the boring suburban thing. Private school, Harvard, and now Med. School.   (Beat) I actually figured out that at the end of it, my brain will be worth a quarter of a million dollars. I shouldn't have told you that...

I bet your parents were happy to pay.

I was happy to pay. I inherited the money.

Is Harvard gettin' all that money?

Stanford. I'm leaving in June after I graduate.

So you just want to use me and go?

Well, I'm gonna experiment on you for my anatomy class, then go.

In that case, fine.   (beat) Want to see my magic trick?

Sure.

Now, I'm gonna make all these caramels disappear.

Okay...

It works better when I have my rabbit.

I didn't see you at the reunion.

I've been busy.

You were missed.   (beat) How long has it been since we've seen each other?

Since Nancy died.

I'm sorry, that damn conference--

I got your card.

Have you ever seen Annie Hall?

No.

Well, there's this part of the movie that's about how there's always this tension on a first date where both people are thinking about what's going to happen with the whole 'good night kiss' thing.

I really don't 'date' that much.

You know what I mean. I know you've at least thought about it.

No I haven't...

Yes you have. You were thinking you were gonna get a good night kiss.

No I wasn't...

Yes you were.

I was kinda' hopin' to get a "good night laid" but... I'll take a kiss.

Oh, you will?

No... I was hoping to get a kiss.

Then why don't we just get it out of the way.

Now?

Yeah.

That had to be the worst good night kiss...

Hey, look lady, I'm just here for the free food.

Free?

Hey, I spent all my money on those caramels.


I've been busy, Gerry. I got a full schedule.

This kid's special, Sean. I've never seen anything like him.

Not much free time, Gerry.

Have you ever heard of a man named Ramanujan?

Yeah.

He was alive over a hundred years ago. He was Indian. Dots, not feathers...

So this Ramanujan lived in a tiny hut in India. No formal education, no access to other works. But he came across an old math book and from this basic text he was able to extrapolate theories that had baffled mathematicians for years.

And he mailed it to Hardy--

That's right, Sean. He mailed it to a professor at Cambridge who immediately recognized the brilliance in his work and brought Ramanujan to England.

Where he contracted pneumonia and died at a young age--

They worked together for the remainder of their lives, producing some of the most exciting math theory ever done. Ramanujan's genius was unparalleled, Sean. This boy is like that. But he's very defensive and I need someone who can get through to him.

Why me?

I need someone with your kind of background.

My kind of background?

You're from the same neighborhood. South Boston.

He's from Southie? How many people did you try before you came to me?

Five.

Who? Barry, Henry, Rick...

Not Rick? You didn't send him to Rick?

Just meet with the boy once a week.

Can we do it at my office?

That would be fine.

Sean, please.

I got it.

It's on the college.

Any vulnerability he senses, he'll exploit.

I'll be okay.

It's a poker game with this young man. Don't let him see what you've got.

Hello, Will. Any trouble finding the place?

No.

Will, this is Sean Maguire. Sean, Will Hunting.

Well, let's get started.

Yeah, let's let the healing begin.

Would you excuse us?

Tom.

You too, Gerry.

Hello, Will. I'm Sean Maguire.

Where are you from in Southie?

Did you buy all these books retail, or do you send away for like a "shrink kit" that comes with all these volumes included?

Have you read all these books, Will?

Probably not.

How about the ones on that shelf?

Yeah, I read those.

What did you think?

I'm not here for a fuckin' book report. They're your books, why don't you read 'em?

I did.

That must have taken you a long time.

Yeah, it did take me a long time.

"A History of the United States, Volume I." If you want to read a real history book, read Howard Zinn's "A People's History of the United States." That book will knock you on your ass.

How about Noam Chomsky's "Manufacturing Consent?"

You people baffle me. You spend all this money on beautiful, fancy books-- and they're the wrong fuckin' books.

You think so?

Whatever blows your hair back.

Guy your age shouldn't smoke so much. Stunt your growth.

You're right. It really gets in the way of my jazzercizing.

Do you lift?

Yes, I do.

Nautilus?

Free weights.

Oh yeah? Me too. What do you bench?

285. 

Oh.

You paint this?

Yeah. Do you paint?

No.

Crayons?

This is a real piece of shit.

Tell me what you really think.

Poor color composition, lousy use of space. But that shit doesn't really concern me.

What does?

The color here, see how dark it is? It's interesting.

What is?

I think you're one step away from cutting your ear off.

Oh, "Starry Night" time, huh?

You ever heard the saying, "any port in a storm?"

Sure, how 'bout "still waters run deep"-

Well, maybe that means you.

Maybe what mea--

Maybe you were in the middle of a storm, a big fuckin' storm -- the waves were crashing over the bow, the Goddamned mast was about to snap, and you were crying for the harbor. So you did what you had to do, to get out. Maybe you became a psychologist.

Maybe you should be a patient and sit down.

Maybe you married the wrong woman.

Watch your mouth.

That's it isn't it? You married the wrong woman. She leave you? Was she bangin' someone else?

How are the seas now, D--

If you ever disrespect my wife again... I will end you.

Time's up.

At ease, gentlemen.

Five minutes, Sean. Are you okay?

I'll understand if you don't want to meet with him again.

Thursday, four o'clock. Make sure the kid is here.

You grew up around here?

Not far from here, South Boston.

How was that?

Pretty boring, I guess.

I bet you have a great family.

You know, nothing special.

You have a lot of brothers and sisters?

Do I have a lot of brothers and sisters?

Yeah.

Well, Irish Catholic. What do you think?

How many?

You wouldn't believe me if I told you.

What, five?

Seven?

Come on.

I have twelve big brothers.

Not a chance.

Yup, you're lookin' at lucky thirteen.

Bullshit.

I swear to God.

Your house must have been a zoo.

It was great. There was always someone to play with, give you advice.

Do you know all their names?

'Course I do, they're my brothers.

Well...

Marky, Ricky, Danny, Terry, Mikey, Davey, Timmy, Tommy, Joey, Robby, Johnny, and Brian.

Do you keep in touch with them?

All the time. We all live in Southie. I live with three of them now.

I want to meet them.

You again. How the paintin' coming?

Come with me.

So what's with this place? You have a swan fetish? Is this something you'd like to talk about?

I was thinking about what you said to me the other day, about my painting. I stayed up half the night thinking about it and then something occurred to me and I fell into a deep peaceful sleep and haven't thought about you since. You know what occurred to me?

No.

You're just a boy. You don't have the faintest idea what you're talking about.

Why thank you.

You've never been out of Boston.

No.

So if I asked you about art you could give me the skinny on every art book ever written... Michelangelo? You know a lot about him I bet. Life's work, criticisms, political aspirations. But you couldn't tell me what it smells like in the Sistine Chapel. You've never stood there and looked up at that beautiful ceiling. And if I asked you about women I'm sure you could give me a syllabus of your personal favorites, and maybe you've been laid a few times too. But you couldn't tell me how it feels to wake up next to a woman and be truly happy. If I asked you about war you could refer me to a bevy of fictional and non-fictional material, but you've never been in one. You've never held your best friend's head in your lap and watched him draw his last breath, looking to you for help. And if I asked you about love I'd get a sonnet, but you've never looked at a woman and been truly vulnerable. Known that someone could kill you with a look. That someone could rescue you from grief. That God had put an angel on Earth just for you. And you wouldn't know how it felt to be her angel. To have the love be there for her forever. Through anything, through cancer. You wouldn't know about sleeping sitting up in a hospital room for two months holding her hand and not leaving because the doctors could see in your eyes that the term "visiting hours" didn't apply to you. And you wouldn't know about real loss, because that only occurs when you lose something you love more than yourself, and you've never dared to love anything that much. I look at you and I don't see an intelligent confident man, I don't see a peer, and I don't see my equal. I see a boy. Nobody could possibly understand you, right Will? Yet you presume to know so much about me because of a painting you saw. You must know everything about me. You're an orphan, right?

Do you think I would presume to know the first thing about who you are because I read "Oliver Twist?" And I don't buy the argument that you don't want to be here, because I think you like all the attention you're getting. Personally, I don't care. There's nothing you can tell me that I can't read somewhere else. Unless we talk about your life. But you won't do that. Maybe you're afraid of what you might say.

It's up to you.

Hello?

Who'd you call?

No one. I didn't have the number.

What are you, retarded? You went all the way out there in the rain and you didn't have the number?

No, it was your mother's 900 number. I just ran out of quarters.

Why don't we get off mothers, I just got off yours.

You're a pretty funny guy. Here, have a nickel.

Keep fuckin' with me. Watch what happens.

All right, then.

Watch what happens.

No smoking.

What do you mean "he didn't talk?" You sat there for an hour?

No, he just sat there and counted the seconds until the session was over. It was pretty impressive, actually.

Why would he do that?

To show me he doesn't have to talk to me if he doesn't want to.

Oh, what is this? Some kind of staring contest between two kids from the "old neighborhood?"

I won't talk first.

Hi, Will.

How you doin', Krystyn.

I didn't get on Cathy last night.

Why not?

I don't know.

Cathy! Why didn't you give me none of your twat last night?

Fuck you and your Irish curse, Chuckie!

She's missin' teeth, Will.

Plus, it's like, five to two Morgan ends up marryin' her. There's only so many times you can bang your friend's future wife...

I'm takin' off.

We're goin' late night.

I'm tired.

You know, I was on this plane once. And I'm sittin' there and the captain comes on and is like "we'll be cruising at 35,000 feet," and does his thing, then he puts the mike down but forgets to turn it off. Then he says "man, all I want right now is a blow-job and a cup of coffee." So the stewardess goes runnin' up towards the cock-pit to tell him the mike's still on, and this guy in the back of the plane goes "don't forget the coffee!"

You've never been on a plane.

I know, but the joke's better if I tell it in the first person.

I have been laid you know.

Yeah? You got a lady now?

Yeah, I went on a date last week.

How'd it go?

Fine.

Well, are you going out again?

I don't know.

Why not?

Haven't called her.

Jesus Christ, you are an amateur.

I know what I'm doing. She's different from the other girls I met. We have a really good time. She's smart, beautiful, fun...

So Christ, call her up.

Why? So I can realize she's not so smart. That she's boring. You don't get it. Right now she's perfect, I don't want to ruin that.

And right now you're perfect too. Maybe you don't want to ruin that.

Well, I think that's a great philosophy Will, that way you can go through your entire life without ever having to really know anybody.

My wife used to turn the alarm clock off in her sleep. I was late for work all the time because in the middle of the night she'd roll over and turn the damn thing off. Eventually I got a second clock and put it under my side of the bed, but it got to where she was gettin' to that one too. She was afraid of the dark, so the closet light was on all night. Thing kept me up half the night. Eventually I'd fall asleep, out of sheer exhaustion and not wake up when I was supposed to cause she'd have already gotten to my alarms.

My wife's been dead two years, Will. And when I think about her, those are the things I think about most. Little idiosyncrasies that only I knew about. Those made her my wife. And she had the goods on me too. Little things I do out of habit. People call these things imperfections Will. It's just who we are. And we get to choose who we're going to let into out weird little worlds. You're not perfect. And let me save you the suspense, this girl you met isn't either. The question is, whether or not you're perfect for each other.  You can know everything in the world, but the only way you're findin' that one out is by giving it a shot. You sure won't get the answer from an old fucker like me. And even if I did know, I wouldn't tell you.

Why not? You told me every other fuckin' thing. You talk more than any shrink I ever met.

I teach this shit, I didn't say I knew how to do it.

You ever think about gettin' remarried?

My wife's dead.

Hence, the word remarried.

My wife's dead.

Well I think that's a wonderful philosophy, Sean. That way you can go through the rest of your life without having to really know anyone.

Time's up.

Where have you been?

I'm sorry, I been real busy.

You were busy? You know, I really was waiting for you to call me.

Sorry. I'm sorry. Give me another crack at it. Let me take you out.

You should have called. I have an "O- chem" lab due tomorrow and it's impossible.   (beat) It's not an excuse dummy. I want to go out with you. But look:

Tomorrow?

Promise?

If you bring the caramels.

I couldn't wait till tomorrow.

How the hell did you do that?

Didn't your mother ever tell you not to look a gift horse in the mouth?

I'm supposed to understand this.


You're not going into surgery tomorrow are you?

No.

Then let's go have some fun.

Really? How'd the date go?

Do you still counsel veterans?   (beat) I read your book last night.

No, I don't.

Why not?

I gave that up when my wife got sick.

Is that why you didn't write anything else?

I didn't write anything else 'cause nobody, including most of my colleagues bothered to read the first one.

Well, I've read you colleagues. Your book was good, Sean.   (beat) All those guys were in your platoon?

Yeah.

What happened to that guy from Kentucky?

Lon? He got married. He has a kid. I kind of lost touch with him after Nancy got sick.

Do you ever wonder what your life would be like if you never met your wife?

What? Do I wonder if I'd be better off if I never met my wife?

No, that's okay. It's an important question. 'Cause you'll have your bad times, which wake you up to the good stuff you weren't paying attention to. And you can fail, as long as you're trying hard. But there's nothing worse than regret.

You don't regret meetin' your wife?

Why? Because of the pain I feel now? I have regrets Will, but I don't regret a singel day I spent with her.

When did you know she was the one?

October 21, 1975. Game six of the World Series. Biggest game in Red Sox history, Me and my friends slept out on the sidewalk all night to get tickets. We were sitting in a bar waiting for the game to start and in walks this girl. What a game that was. Tie game in the bottom of the tenth inning, in steps Carlton Fisk, hit a long fly ball down the left field line. Thirty-five thousand fans on their feet, screamin' at the ball to stay fair. Fisk is runnin' up the baseline, wavin' at the ball like a madman. It hits the foul pole, home run. Thirty-five thousand people went crazy. And I wasn't one of them.

Where were you?

I was havin' a drink with my future wife.

You missed Pudge Fisk's homerun to have a drink with a woman you had never met?

That's right.

So wait a minute. The Red Sox haven't won a World Series since nineteen eighteen, you slept out for tickets, games gonna start in twenty minutes, in walks a girl you never seen before, and you give your ticket away?

You should have seen this girl. She lit up the room.

I don't care if Helen of Troy walked into that bar! That's game six of the World Series!

And what kind of friends are these? They let you get away with that?

I just slid my ticket across the table and said "sorry fellas, I gotta go see about a girl."

"I gotta go see about a girl"? What did they say?

They could see that I meant it.

You're kiddin' me.

No Will, I'm not kiddin' you. If I had gone to see that game I'd be in here talkin' abouta girl I saw at a bar twenty years ago. And how I always regretted not goin' over there and talkin' to her. I don't regret the eighteen years we were married. I don't regret givin' up counseling for six years when she got sick. I don't regret being by her side for the last two years when things got real bad. And I sure as Hell don't regret missing that damn game.

Would have been nice to catch that game though.

Well hell, I didn't know Pudge was gonna hit the home run.

Alexander, I know your theory. The boy is updating, he's strategy stealing...

With a Ramses graph on the binary tree--

But what he's doing, he's attaching an edge to the adjacent vertex. He can always failsafe to either side--

Maker can. This is not new, Gerry!

But I can always garbage out   (writes frantically) All the way to "N" to the minus one.

No, there's a limit.

The limit is not found!   (turns to Will) The limit is not found.

But I can always go to the other side.

There is no proof--

Maker builds "K" to the "N." N is three to the K times--

But

Look, I wrote it down.

It's just simpler this way.

Alexander, your theory is changed.

Why do we always stay here?

'Cause it's nicer than my place.

I've never seen your place.

Exactly.

What about your friends? Or your brothers? When do I get to meet them?

They don't come over here that much.

I think I can make it to South Boston.

Aah, it's kind of a hike.

Is it me you're hiding from them or the other way around?

All right, all right. We'll go.

When?

Sometime. I don't know. Next week.

What if I said I wouldn't sleep with you again until you let me meet your friends?

I'd say...   (reaches for phone) It's only four in the mornin', they're prob'ly up.

You men are shameful. If you're not thinking of your wiener then you're acting on its behalf.

Then on behalf of my wiener, I'd like to ask for an advance.

Will, I can't believe you brought Skylar here when we're all wrecked. What's she gonna think about us?

Yeah, Morgan. It's a real rarity that we'd be out drinkin'.

I've been shit faced for like two weeks.

Oh great, tell her that! Now she really thinks we're problem drinkers!

Two weeks? That's nothin'. My Uncle Marty? Will knows him. That guy fuckin' drinks like you've never seen! One night he was drivin' back to his house on I-93 -- Statie pulls him over.

Oh shit.

Guy's tryin' to walk the line -- but he can't even fuckin' stand up, and so my uncle's gonna spend a night in jail. Just then there's this fuckin' BOOM like fifty yards down the road. Some guy's car hit a tree.

Some other guy?

Yeah, he was probably drunker than my Uncle, who fuckin' knows? So the cop goes "Stay here" And he goes runnin' down the highway to deal with the other crash. So, my Uncle Marty's standin' on the side of the road for a little while, and he's so fuckin' lit, that he forgets what he's waitin' for. So he goes, "Fuck it." He gets in his car and drives home.

Holy shit.

So in the morning, there's a knock on the door it's the Statie. So my Uncle's like, "Is there a problem?" And the Statie's like "I pulled you over and you took off." And my Uncle's like "I never seen you before in my life, I been home all night with my kids." And Statie's like "Let me get in your garage!" So he's like "All right, fine." He takes around the garage and opens the door -- and the Statie's cruiser is in my Uncle's garage.

No way! You're kiddin'!

No, he was so hammered that he drove the police cruiser home. Fuckin' lights and everything!

Did your Uncle get arrested?

The fuckin' Trooper was so embarrassed he didn't do anything. The fuckin' guy had been drivin' around in my Uncle's car all night lookin' for the house.

There was this Irish guy, walking down the beach one day.

And he comes across a bottle, and this Genie pops out. The genie turns to the Irishman and says -- "You've released me from my prison, so I'll grant you three wishes." The Irish guy thinks for a minute and says "What I really want is a pint of Guiness that never empties." And -- POOF! A bottle appears. He slams it down, and -- lo and behold -- it fills back up again.

Well, the Irish guy can't believe it. He drinks it again, and again -- BOOM! It fills back up. So, while the Irish guy is marveling at his good fortune, The Genie is getting impatient, because it's hot and he wants to get on with his freedom. He says "Let's go, you have two more wishes." The Irish guy slams his drink again, it fills back up, he's still amazed. The Genie can't take it anymore. He says "Buddy, I'm boiling out here. What are your other two wishes?"   (beat) The Irish guy looks at his drink, looks at the Genie and says... "I guess I'll have two more of these."

It's a good thing no one's Irish here.

I'm Irish.

I'm glad you came by, changed my opinion of Harvard people.

See ya' Chuckie. I had fun.

I don't know what the fuck you're doin'. You're givin' us a ride.

What do I look like, Al Cowlins?   (seriously) You want to take my car, drop her off?

I was countin' on it.

Chuck, let's go.

You're walkin' bitch, Will's takin' the car.

Thanks, Chuck.

Don't get too slap-happy, you're takin' me home first.

I don't know, Chuck. It's kinda outta the way.

Just 'cause you don't have to sleep in the one room palace, don't start thinkin' you're bad.

I thought you said you'd show me your place.

Not tonight.

Yeah, not tonight. Not any other night.

I wanted to meet your brothers...

They're all sleepin' now.   (a beat, to Chuckie) Let me get those keys.

What I want to know, Gerry, is when we get to meet this wonder-boy.

We're still working together, the boy's a little rough.

We've got our share of eccentric geniuses at Tri-tech. We know how to deal with that.

I think we all do.

If you're not exaggerating, Gerry--

Was I exaggerating in nineteen eighty- four when I told you I'd win the Field's medal within two years?

In that case the boy could run shipping for us, routing--

You say he doesn't have a diploma, but we'll—

I don't need to see a driver's license. I can think of three departments right now that he could head up for us.

At ease, gentlemen. We're looking carefully at all our options.

All right, Gerry. Close to the vest.   (gives him his card) Good luck with these vultures.

So she goes runnin' up the aisle and I figure "fuck it" and I yell out "don't forget the coffee!

Bullshit! You didn't say that!

Jesus Christ, Marty. It's a joke.

Gerry! Any trouble finding the place?

Not at all.

Timmy this is Gerry, an old friend of mine. We went to college together.

Good to meet you.

Pleasure to meet you.

Could we get a couple of sandwiches?   (beat, smiles) Put it on my tab.

You ever plan on payin' your tab?

I got the winning numbers right here.

What's the jackpot?

Twelve million.

I don't think that'll cover it.

You're here quite a bit, then.

I live right around the corner.

You moved?

I been here a couple years.

You wanted to talk about Will?

Seems like it's going well.

I think so.

Well, have you talked to him at all about his future?

We haven't really gotten into it.

Maybe you should. My phone's been ringing off the hook with job offers.

Jobs doing what?

Cutting edge mathematics. Think tanks. The kind of place where a mind like Will's is given free reign.

That's great, Gerry, that there's interest -- But I'm not sure he's ready for that.

Sean, I really don't think you understand--

What don't I understand?

Thanks, Timmy.

Excuse me, Timmy. Could you help us? We're trying to settle a bet.

Uh-oh.

Have you heard of Jonas Salk?

Yeah, cured polio.

You've heard of Albert Einstein?

How about Gerald Lambeau? Ever heard of him?

No.

Okay thank you, Timmy.

So who won the bet?

I did.

This isn't about me. I'm nothing compared to this young man.   (beat) Sean, in 1905 there were hundreds of Professors who were renowned for their study of the universe. But it was a 26-year-old Swiss Patent clerk, doing physics in his spare time, who changed the world, Sean. Can you imagine if Einstein had given that up? Or gotten drunk with his buddies in Vienna every night? All of us would have lost something. And I'm quite sure Timmy never would have heard of him.

Isn't that a little dramatic, Gerry?

No, Sean. This boy has that gift. He just hasn't got the direction. We can give that to him.

He married his cousin.

Who?

Einstein. Had two marriages, both trainwrecks. The guy never saw his kids, one of whom, I think, ended up in an asylum- possible Unabomber addition--

You see, Sean? That's exactly not the point. No one remembers that. They--

I do.

Well, you're the only one.

This boy can make contributions to the world. We can help him do that.

Just... take it easy, Gerry.

Look, I don't know what else I can say. I'm not sitting at home every night, twisting my mustache and hatching a plan to ruin the boy's life. But it's important to start early. I was doing advanced mathematics at eighteen and it still took me twenty-three years to do something worthy of a Field's medal.

Maybe he doesn't care about that.

Sean, this is important. And it's above personal rivalry--

Now wait a minute, Gerry--

No, no you hear me out, Sean. This young man is a true prodigy--

Personal rivalry? I'm not getting back at you.

Look, you took one road and I took another. That's fine.

Is it Gerry? 'Cause I don't think it's fine with you. Give him time to figure out what he wants.

That's a wonderful theory, Sean. It worked wonders for you.

Sean, I came here today out of courtesy. I wanted to keep you in the loop. As we speak the boy is in a meeting I set up for him over at Tri-tech.

Well, Will, I'm not exactly sure what you mean, we've already offered you a position..

Since this is obviously not my first time in such altercations, let me say this:

Look, we can do this the easy way or the hard way.

At the current time I am looking at a number of different fields from which to disseminate which offer is most pursuant aid to my benefit.   (a beat) What do you want? What do I want? What does anybody want? Leniency.

I'm not sure--

These circumstances are mitigated. Right now. They're mitigated.

Okay...

He knows what I'm talking about.

A retainer. Nobody in this town works without a retainer. You think you can find someone who does, you have my blessin'. But I think we all know that person isn't going to represent you as well as I can.

Will, our offer starts you at eighty- four thousand a year, plus benefits.

Retainer...

You want us to give you cash right now?

Allegedly, what I am saying is your situation will be concurrently improved if I had two hundred sheets in my pocket right now.

I don't think I... Larry?

I have about seventy-three...

Will you take a check?

Come now... what do you think I am, a juvenile? You don't got any money on you right now. You think I'm gonna take a check?

It's fine, John, I can cover the rest.

That's right, you know.   (turns to #1) He knows.

You're suspect. I don't know what your reputation is, but after the shit you tried to pull today, you can bet I'll be looking into it. Any conversations you want to have with me heretofore, you can have with my attorney. Gentlemen, keep your ears to the grindstone.

How's it goin'?

Fine.

Want me to take a look?

No.

C'mon, give me a peek and we'll go to the battin' cages.

It's important that I learn this.

Why is it important to you? If I inherited all that money, the only thing important to me would be workin' on my swing.

Clearly.

You're rich. What do you have to worry about?

Rich? I have an inheritance. It's two hundred and fifty thousand dollars. That's exactly what it'll cost me, minus about five hundred bucks, to go all the way through med school. This is what I'm doing with that money. I could have done anything I wanted. I could have expanded my wardrobe, substantially.

Instead you're going to bust your ass for five years so you can be broke?

No, so I can be a doctor.

All right, Mr. Nosey Parker. Let me ask you a question? Do you have a photographic memory?

I guess. I don't know. How do you remember your phone number?

Have you ever studied Organic Chemistry?

Some, a little.

Just for fun?

I guess so.

Nobody does organic chemistry for "fun." It's unnecessary. Especially for someone like you.

Like me?

Yeah. Someone like you who divides his time, fairly evenly, between the batting cages and bars.

How did you do that? I can't... I mean even the smartest people I know, and we do have a few at Harvard, have to study- a lot. It's hard.   (beat) Listen, Will, if you don't want to tell me--

Do you play the piano?

Come one Will. I just want to know.

I'm trying to explain it to you. So you play the piano. When you look at the keys, you see music, you see Mozart.

I see "Hot Cross Buns," but okay.

Well all right, Beethoven. He looked at a piano and saw music. The fuckin' guy was deaf when he composed the Ode to Joy. They had to turn him around to take a bow because he couldn't hear the crowd going crazy behind him. Stone deaf. He saw all of that music in his head.

So, do you play the piano?

Not a lick. I look at a piano and I see black and white keys, three pedals and a box of wood. Beethoven, Mozart, they looked at it and it just made sense to them. They saw a piano and they could play. I couldn't paint you a picture, I probably can't hit the ball out of Fenway Park and I can't play the piano--

But you can do my O-chem lab in under an hour, you can--

When it came to stuff like that I could always just play.

I can't believe it's taken me four years to meet you and I'm going to California in two months, Will.   (beat) Have you ever been to California? I bet you'd like it.

Maybe not.

Get it, ma!

How you doin'?

Good.

How'd you know where to find me?

You were the only Sullivan in the phone book.

Will and I dropped you off here, remember?

Oh, right.

This is your house, right?

Get in here, Chuckie!

Pipe down, Ma!

I guess so.

What? No. This is my mother's house. I don't live with my mother. I just stop by, help out. I'm good like that.

Is this a bad time?

She'll live.   (beat) If she starts yelling again I might have to run in real quick and beat her with the stick again but...

Okay.

Let's take a walk.

See, now this doesn't feel right.   (beat) When I made the decision to come over here it felt right. I had all these rationalizations... I just don't understand why Will never tells me anything, he won't let me get close to him, he tells me these weird lies--

You caught that, huh?

I just wanted to find out what was going on... But now that I'm here it seems strange, doesn't it?

Well, I don't have no trousers on...

I know why you're here. Will don't talk much.

I don't care what his family's like or if he doesn't have any brothers, but he doesn't have to lie to me.

I really don't know what to say. Look, I lie to women all the time. That's just my way.   (beat) Last week Morgan brought these girls down from Roslindale. I told them I was a cosmonaut. They believed me. But Will's not usually like that--

Put some clothes on, Sullivan!

Take it easy father!

All I can say is; I known Will a long time -- And I seen him with every girl he's ever been with. But I've never seen him like this before, ever with anyone, like how he is with you.

Is that true?

Yeah, it is.

This is correct. I see you used Mclullen here--

I don't know what it's called.

This can't be right.   (examining proof) This is going to be very embarrassing. Have you ever considered--

I'm pretty sure it's right.

Can I ask you a favor, can we do this at Sean's from now on? 'Cause I leave work to come here and the fuckin' commute is killin' me--

That's fine, but did you ever think--

It's right.   (a beat, heading out) Take it home with you.

Will, what happened at the Tri-tech meeting?

I couldn't go 'cause I had a date. So I sent my chief negotiator.

Will, on your own time, you can do what you like. When I set up a meeting, with my associates, and you don't show up it reflects poorly on me.

Then don't set up any more meetings.

I'll cancel every meeting right now. I'll give you a job myself. I just wanted you to see what was out there.

Maybe I don't want to spend my life sittin' around and explaining shit to people.

The least you can do is show me a little appreciation.

You know how fuckin' easy this is to me? This is a joke!   (crumples proof) And I'm sorry you can't do this. I really am. 'Cause if you could I wouldn't be forced to watch you fumble around and fuck it up.

Sure, then you'd have more time to sit around and get drunk. Think of how many fights you could have been in by now.

You're right, Will. I can't do that proof and you can. And when it comes to this there are only twenty people in the world that can tell the difference between you and me. But I'm one of them.

Well, I'm sorry.

So am I.   (beat) Yes. That's right, Will. Most days I wish I never met you. Because then I could sleep at night. I wouldn't have to walk around with the knowledge that someone like you was out there. And I wouldn't have to watch you throw it all away.

Will? Are you awake?

No.

Come with me to California.

What?

I want you to come with me.

How do you know that?

I know. I just do.

Yeah, but how do you know?

I don't know. I just feel it.

And you're sure about that?

Yeah, I'm sure.

'Cause that's a serious thing you're sayin'. I mean, we might be in California next week and you could find out somethin' about me that you don't like. And you might feel like "hey this is a big mistake."   (getting upset) But you can't take it back, 'cause you know it's real serious and you can't take somethin' like that back. Now I'm in California, 'cause you asked me to come. But you don't really want me there. And I'm stuck in California with someone who really doesn't want me there and just wishes they had a take-back.

"Take-back?" What is that? I don't want a take-back. I want you to come to California with me.

I can't go out to California.

Why not?

One, because I have a job here and two because I live here--

Look, Will if you're not in love with me, you can say that.

I'm not sayin' I'm not in love with you.

Then what are you afraid of?

What do you mean "What am I afraid of?"

Why won't you come with me? What are you so scared of?

What am I scared of?

Well, what aren't you scared of?  You live in your safe little world where nobody challenges you and you're scared shitless to do anything else--

Don't tell me about my world. You're the one that's afraid. You just want to have your little fling with the guy from the other side of town and marry--

Is that what you think--

some prick from Stanford that your parents will approve of. Then you'll sit around with the rest of the upper crust kids and talk about how you went slummin' too.

I inherited that money when I was thirteen, when my father died.

At least you have a mother.

Fuck you! You think I want this? That money's a burden to me. Every day I wake up and I wish I could give that back. I'd give everything I have back to spend one more day with my father. But that's life. And I deal with it. So don't put that shit on me. You're the one that's afraid.

What the fuck am I afraid of?!

You're afraid of me. You're afraid that I won't love you back. And guess what? I'm afraid too. But at least I have the balls to it give it a shot. At least I'm honest with you.

I'm not honest?

What about your twelve brothers?

Oh, is that what this is about? You want to hear that I don't really have any brothers? That I'm a fuckin' orphan? Is that what you want to hear?

Yes, Will. I didn't even know that?

No, you don't want to hear that.

Yes, I do, Will.

You don't want to hear that I got cigarettes put out on me when I was a little kid. That this isn't surgery.

You don't want to hear that. Don't tell me you want to hear that shit!!

Yes I do. Did you ever think that maybe I could help you? That maybe that's the point, that we're a team?

What, you want to come in here and save me? Is that what you want to do? Do I have a sign that says "save me" on my back?

I don't want to "save" you. I just want to be with you. I love you. I love you!

Don't bullshit me! Don't fuckin' bullshit me!

You know what I want to hear? I want to hear that you don't love me. If you tell me that, then I'll leave you alone. I won't ask any questions and I won't be in your life.

I don't love you.

Will sits across from two N.S.A. AGENTS, OLIVER DYTRESS and ROBERT TAVANO. These guys are smug, clean cut, gung-ho and looking sharp in twin navy blue suits.

So why do you think I should work for the National Security Agency?

Well, you'd be working on the cutting edge. You'd be exposed to the kind of technology you couldn't see anywhere else because we've classified it. Super string theory, Chaos Math, Advanced algorithms--

Codebreaking.

That's one aspect of what we do.

Come on, that's what you do. You handle more than eighty percent of the intelligence workload. You're seven times the size of the C.I.A.

That's exactly right, Will. So the question as I see it isn't "why should you work for N.S.A." it's "why shouldn't you?"

Why shouldn't I work for the National Security Agency? That's a tough one.

Morgan, if you're watchin' pornos in my mom's room again I'm gonna give you a fuckin' beatin'!

What's up guys?

Why don't you beat off at your house?

I don't have a VCR at my house.

I just wanted to call before you left.   (beat) I'm takin' all these job interviews. So I won't just be a construction worker.

I never cared about that.

Yeah.

I love you, Will.   (pause) No take-backs.

Will?

Take care.

Goodbye.

I can... I'm almost there.

What are you smiling at?

It's a Carlton Fisk baseball card.

Pudge Fisk. You follow baseball?

No.

Oh, well, it's just somethin' Sean told me. It's a long story.

You all set?

I've got the first part. The rest I can do at home.

Will, the N.S.A. has been calling me just about every hour. They're very excited about how the meeting went.

Yeah.

So you might be working for Uncle Sam.

I don't know.

Gerry says the meeting went well.

I guess.

What did you think?

What did I think?

Say I'm working at N.S.A. Somebody puts a code on my desk, something nobody else can break. So I take a shot at it and maybe I break it. And I'm real happy with myself, 'cause I did my job well. But maybe that code was the location of some rebel army in North Africa or the Middle East. Once they have that location, they bomb the village where the rebels were hiding and fifteen hundred people I never had a problem with get killed. (rapid fire) Now the politicians are sayin' "send in the Marines to secure the area" 'cause they don't give a shit. It won't be their kid over there, gettin' shot. Just like it wasn't them when their number got called, 'cause they were pullin' a tour in the National Guard. It'll be some guy from Southie takin' shrapnel in the ass. And he comes home to find that the plant he used to work at got exported to the country he just got back from. And the guy who put the shrapnel in his ass got his old job, 'cause he'll work for fifteen cents a day and no bathroom breaks. Meanwhile my buddy from Southie realizes the only reason he was over there was so we could install a government that would sell us oil at a good price. And of course the oil companies used the skirmish to scare up oil prices so they could turn a quick buck. A cute, little ancillary benefit for them but it ain't helping my buddy at two-fifty a gallon. And naturally they're takin' their sweet time bringin' the oil back and maybe even took the liberty of hiring an alcoholic skipper who likes to drink seven and sevens and play slalom with the icebergs and it ain't too long 'til he hits one, spills the oil, and kills all the sea-life in the North Atlantic. So my buddy's out of work and he can't afford to drive so he's got to walk to the job interviews which sucks 'cause the shrapnel in his ass is givin' him chronic hemorrhoids. And meanwhile he's starvin' 'cause every time he tries to get a bite to eat the only blue-plate special they're servin' is North Atlantic scrod with Quaker State.

So what'd I think? I'm holdin' out for somethin' better. I figure I'll eliminate the middle man. Why not just shoot my buddy, take his job and give it to his sworn enemy, hike up gas prices, bomb a village, club a baby seal, hit the hash pipe and join the National Guard? Christ, I could be elected President.

Do you think you're alone?

What?

Do you have a soul-mate?

Define that.

Someone who challenges you in every way. Who takes you places, opens things up for you. A soul-mate.

Yeah.

Shakespeare, Neitzche, Frost, O'Connor, Chaucer, Pope, Kant--

They're all dead.

Not to me, they're not.

But you can't give back to them, Will.

Not without a heater and some serious smelling salts, no...

That's what I'm saying, Will. You'll never have that kind of relationship in a world where you're afraid to take the first step because all you're seeing are the negative things that might happen ten miles down the road.

Oh, what? You're going to take the professor's side on this?

Don't give me your line of shit.

I didn't want the job.

It's not about that job. I'm not saying you should work for the government. But, you could do anything you want. And there are people who work their whole lives layin' brick so their kids have a chance at the kind of opportunity you have. What do you want to do?

I didn't ask for this.

Nobody gets what they ask for, Will. That's a cop-out.

Why is it a cop-out? I don't see anythin' wrong with layin' brick, that's somebody's home I'm buildin'. Or fixin' somebody's car, somebody's gonna get to work the next day 'cause of me. There's honor in that.

You're right, Will. Any man who takes a forty minute train ride so those college kids can come in in the morning and their floors will be clean and their trash cans will be empty is an honorable man.

And when they get drunk and puke in the sink, they don't have to see it the next morning because of you. That's real work, Will. And there is honor in that. Which I'm sure is why you took the job.

I just want to know why you decided to sneak around at night, writing on chalkboards and lying about it.   (beat) 'Cause there's no honor in that.

Something you want to say?

Why don't you come back when you have an answer for me.

What?

If you won't answer my questions, you're wasting my time.

What?

Who the fuck are you to lecture me about life? You fuckin' burnout! Where's your "soul-mate?!"

Dead! She dies and you just cash in your chips. That's a fuckin' cop- out!

I been there. I played my hand.

That's right. And you fuckin' lost!  And some people would have the sack to lose a big hand like that and still come back and ante up again!

Look at me. What do you want to do?

You and your bullshit. You got an answer for everybody. But I asked you a straight question and you can't give me a straight answer. Because you don't know.

What I mean, Sean, is that I'm sitting in your office and the boy isn't here.   (beat) Well, it's ten past three.   (beat) An hour and ten minutes late.   (beat) Well, if he doesn't show up and I have to file a report saying he wasn't here and he goes back to jail, it won't be on my conscience, Sean.   (beat) Fine.

What should I do?

The boy was here. He came in, sat down and we worked together.

He came in, sat down, and we worked together.

Okay.

How's the woman?

Gone.

What?

She went to Medical school in California.

Sorry, brother.   (beat) I don't know what to tell ya. You know all the girls I been with. You been with 'em too, except for Cheryl McGovern which was a big mistake on your part brother...

Oh I'm sure, that's why only one of us has herpes.

Some shows are worth the price of admission, partner.

My fuckin' back is killin' me.

So, when are you done with those meetin's?

Week after I'm twenty-one.

Are they hookin' you up with a job?

Yeah, sit in a room and do long division for the next fifty years.

Yah, but it's better than this shit. At least you'd make some nice bank.

Yeah, be a fuckin' lab rat.

It's a way outta here.

What do I want a way outta here for?  I want to live here the rest of my life. I want to be your next door neighbor. I want to take out kids to little league together up Foley Field.

Look, you're my best friend, so don't take this the wrong way, but in 20 years, if you're livin' next door to me, comin' over watchin' the fuckin' Patriots' games and still workin' construction, I'll fuckin' kill you. And that's not a threat, that's a fact. I'll fuckin' kill you.

Chuckie, what are you talkin'...

Listen, you got somethin' that none of us have.

Why is it always this? I owe it to myself? What if I don't want to?

You owe it to me. Tomorrow I'm gonna wake up and I'll be fifty and I'll still be doin' this. And that's all right 'cause I'm gonna make a run at it. But you, you're sittin' on a winning lottery ticket and you're too much of a pussy to cash it in. And that's bullshit 'cause I'd do anything to have what you got! And so would any of these guys.  It'd be a fuckin' insult to us if you're still here in twenty years.

You don't know that.

Let me tell you what I do know. Every day I come by to pick you up, and we go out drinkin' or whatever and we have a few laughs. But you know what the best part of my day is? The ten seconds before I knock on the door 'cause I let myself think I might get there, and you'd be gone. I'd knock on the door and you wouldn't be there. You just left.

Now, I don't know much. But I know that.

This is a disaster! I brought you in here to help me with this boy, not to run him out--

Now wait a minute--

And confuse him--

Gerry--

And here I am for the second week in a row with my professional reputation at stake--

Hold on!

Ready to falsify documents because you've given him license to walk away from this.

I know what I'm doing and I know why I'm here!

Look Sean, I don't care if you have a rapport with the boy -- I don't care if you have a few laughs -- even at my expense! But don't you dare undermine what I'm trying to do here.

"Undermine?"

He has a gift and with that gift comes responsibility. And you don't understand that he's at a fragile point--

He is at a fragile point. He's got problems--

What problems does he have, Sean, that he is better off as a janitor or in jail or hanging around with--

Why do you think he does that, Gerry?

He can handle the work, he can handle the pressure and he's obviously handled you.

Why is he hiding? Why is he a janitor? Why doesn't he trust anybody? Because the first thing that happened to him was that he was abandoned by the people who were supposed to love him the most!

Oh, come on, Sean--

And why does he hang out with his friends? Because any one of those kids would come in here and take a bat to your head if he asked them to. It's called loyalty!

Oh, that's nice--

And who do you think he's handling?  He pushes people away before they have a chance to leave him. And for 20 years he's been alone because of that. And if you try to push him into this, it's going to be the same thing all over again. And I'm not going to let that happen to him!

Now don't do that. Don't you do that! Don't infect him with the idea that it's okay to quit. That it's okay to be a failure, because it's not okay! If you're angry at me for being successful, for being what you could have been--

I'm not angry at you--

Yes you are, Sean. You resent me. And I'm not going to apologize for any success that I've had.

I don't have any anger at you--

Yes you do. You're angry at me for doing what you could have done. Ask yourself if you want Will to feel that way for the rest of his life, to feel like a failure.

That's it. That's why I don't come to the goddamn reunions! Because I can't stand the look in your eye when you see me! You think I'm a failure! I know who I am. I'm proud of who I am. And all of you, you think I'm some kind of pity case! You with your sycophant students following you around. And your Goddamn Medal!

Is that what this is about, Sean? The Field's Medal? Do you want me to go home and get it for you? Then will you let the boy--

I don't want your trophy and I don't give a shit about it! 'Cause I knew you when!! You and Jack and Tom Sanders. I knew you when you were homesick and pimply-faced and didn't know what side of the bed to piss on!
That's right! You were smarter than us then and you're smarter than us now! So don't blame me for how your life turned out. It's not my fault.

I don't blame you! It's not about that! It's about the boy! 'Cause he's a good kid! And I won't see this happen to him- won't see you make him feel like a failure too!

He won't be a failure!

If you push him into something, if you ride him--

You're wrong, Sean. I'm where I am today because I was pushed. And because I learned to push myself!

He's not you!

I can come back.

No, that's fine, Will. I was just leaving.

Well, I'm here.   (beat) So, is that my problem? I'm afraid of being abandoned? That was easy.

Look, a lot of that stuff goes back a long way. And it's between me and him and it has nothing to do with you.

Do you want to talk about it?

What's that?

Oh, this is your file. I have to send it back to the Judge with my evaluation.

You're not going to fail me are you?

So what's it say?

You want to read it?

No.   (beat) Have you had any experience with that?

Twenty years of counseling you see a lot of--

No, have you had any experience with that?

Yes.

It sure ain't good.

My dad used to make us walk down to the park and collect the sticks he was going to beat us with. Actually the worst of the beatings were between me and my brother. We would practice on each other trying to find sticks that would break.

He used to just put a belt, a stick and a wrench on the kitchen table and say "choose."

Gotta go with the belt there...

I used to go with the wrench.

The wrench, why?

Cause fuck him, that's why.

Is that why me and Skylar broke up?

I didn't know you had. Do you want to talk about that?   (beat) I don't know a lot, Will. But let me tell you one thing. All this history, this shit...   (indicates file) Look here, son.

This is not your fault.

Oh, I know.

It's not your fault.

I know.

It's not your fault.

I know.

It's not your fault.

I know.

It's not your fault.

It's not your fault.

I know.

It's not...

I know, I know...

Can I help you?

Yeah, my name is Will Hunting. I'm here about a position.

One moment.

Oh my God, I got the most fucked up thing I been meanin' to tell you.

Save it for your mother, funny guy. We heard it before.

Oh, Morgan.

Sorry to miss this.

You and Morgan throw?

No, I had to talk him down.

Why didn't you yoke him?

Little Morgan's got a lot a scrap, dude. I'd rather fight a big kid, they never fight, everyone's scared of 'em. You know how many people try to whip Morgan's ass every week? Fuckin' kid won't back down.

What'd you say about me?

Hey, asshole. Happy Birthday.

You thought we forgot, didn't you? I know I'm gettin' my licks in.

Shut up, Morgan.   (to Will) Here's your present.

You're kiddin' me.

Yeah, I figured now that you got your big job over in Cambridge, you needed some way to get over there and I knew I wasn't gonna drive you every day...

Morgan wanted to get you a "T" pass.

No I didn't...

But you're twenty-one now, so--

Yeah, now that you can drink legally, we thought the best thing to get you was a car.

You're kiddin' me.   (a beat) This is the ugliest fuckin' car I ever seen in my life.

How the fuck did you guys do this?

Me and Bill scraped together the parts, worked on it. Morgan was out panhandlin' every day.

I did the body work. Whose fuckin' router you think sanded out all that bondo?

Guy's been up my ass for two years about a fuckin' job. I had to let him help with the car.

So, you finally got a job Morgan?

Had one, now I'm fucked again.

So what do you got, a fuckin' Hyundai engine under there? Can I make it back to my house?

I re-built the engine myself. That thing could make it to Hawaii if you wanted it to.

Which one did you take, Will?

Over at Tri-tech. One of the jobs Professor Lambeau set me up with. I haven't told him yet, but I talked to my new boss over there and he seemed like a nice guy.

That's what you want?

Yeah, I think so.

Good for you. Congratulations.

Thanks you.   (a beat) So, that's it? We're done?

We're done. You did your time. You're a free man.

I just want you to know, Sean...

You're Welcome, Will.

I'll keep in touch.

I'm gonna travel a little bit, so I don't know where I'll be.

I just... figured it's time I put my money back on the table, see what kind of cards I get.

I'll be checking in with my machine at the college. If you ever need anything, just call.

Do what's in your heart, son. You'll be fine.

Thanks you, Sean.

No. Thank you.

Does this violate the patient/doctor relationship?

Only if you grab my ass.

See ya.

Good luck.

Will.

Hey, how you doin'?

You know, you're no longer required to come here.

I was just sayin' goodbye to Sean.

Sam called me. From Tri-tech. He says you start working for them next week.

Well, that's, I think that's terrific. Congratulations.

Thank you.

I just want you to know... It's been a pleasure.

This job... Do it if it's what you really want.
 
I appreciate that.

Hey, Gerry.

Yes.

Listen, I'll be nearby so, if you need some help, or you get stuck again, don't be afraid to give me a call.

Thank you, Will. I'll do that.

Hello, Sean.

Come in.

Sean...

Me too.

So I hear you're taking some time.

Yeah. Summer vacation. Thought I'd travel some. Maybe write a little bit.

Where're you going?

I don't know. India maybe.

Why there?

Never been.

Do you know when you'll be back?

I got this mailer the other day. Class of Sixty-five is having this event in six months.

I got one of those too.

You should come. I'll buy you a drink.

Sean...

The drinks at those things are free.

Hell, I know that.

How about one now?

Sounds good.

It's on you though, until eight o'clock tonight when I win my money.

 Sean -- If the Professor calls about that job, just tell him, "Sorry, I had to go see about a girl."

============================================================
Monday, September first. Six-fifteen.

The alchemist awakes. 

"Turn lead into gold, Max, lead into gold." Today, I find it.

Heat's been getting to Euclid. Feel it most in the afternoon when I run the set. Have to keep the fans on all night from now on. Otherwise, everything is running topnotch. The stack of 286's is now faster than Columbia's computer science department. I spent a couple hundred dollars. Columbia's cost? Half a million? 	(Small snicker) Ha...
	
Max, Max! Can we do one?
	
Jenna! Jenna!
	
Oh, no.
	
What's three hundred and twenty-two times four hundred and ninety-one.
	
One hundred fifty-eight thousand, a hundred two. Right?

Right.
	
Jenna...
	
Okay, seventy-three divided by twenty-two.

Three point three one eight one eight one eight...

Somewhere in there. Somewhere. I know it's right in front of me. The pattern. They say it's chaos, it can't be understood, too much complexity.

History it's there. Lurking, shaping. structuring, hiding, right beneath the surface.

The cycling of disease epidemics, the wax and wane of Caribou populations in the Arctic, sunspot cycles, the rise and fall of the Nile and yes! the New York Stock Exchange, they are all the same.
	
I'll find this structure, this order, this perfection.

Turn lead into gold. The first. Right here. Right here. With math. The numbers of the stock market are my lead. When I find the pattern, then I will find gold.
	
Hello?
	
Maximilian Cohen, please.
	
Yeah?
	
Mr. Cohen?
	
Who's this?
	
Hi. my name is Marcy Dawson. I'm a partner with the predictive strategy firm Lancet-Percy. Can I speak with Mr. Cohen, please?

I told you...
	
Mr. Cohen! How are you? It's been a long time. Sorry I haven't been in touch. But I was hoping you would allow me to take you to lunch tomorrow, say one o'clock?
	
Sorry, I can't.
	
We're very anxious to talk with you, sir

I can't.
	
I'm prepared to make you a generous...

I don't take offers for my research. You know that. Sorry, I Couldn't help you.
	
Mr. Cohen, give me a moment...

Max, good! 
	
Hi, Devi.
	
I grabbed you some somosas. 		

Great.
	
Your hair.
	
What are you doing?
	
Your hair, you can't go out like that. Don't worry. 		

It's fine. It's fine.
	
You need a mom.
	
I have to go.
	
Your somosas!
	
Thanks.
	
Sixteen, twenty-seven. Results: Euclid shows tomorrow's Dow closing up by four points. Anomalies include PRONET at sixty-fire and a quarter, a career high. Possible explanations, either A, an error in the June fifth algorithm, or B, Euclid's main processor is running a recursion...

I'll put it out. 	(Which he does) The name's Lenny Meyer
	
And you are?
	
Max.
	
Max? 
	
Max Cohen.
	
Cohen! 	(Judging) Jewish? 

It's okay. I'm a Jew, too. Do you practice?

No, I'm not interested in religion.

Have you ever heard of Kabbalah?

No.

Jewish mysticism.
	
I'm sorry, I'm very busy.
	
I understand...it's just that it's a very exciting time in our history. Right now is a critical moment in time.

Really?
	
Yes, it's very exciting. Have you ever put on Tefillin?

Tefillin. You know Tefillin. I know it looks strange. But it's an amazing tradition that has a tremendous amount of power. It's a mitzvah for all Jewish men to do. Mitzvahs, good deeds, are spiritual food for our hearts and our heads.

They purify us and bring us closer to God. You want to try it?

I gotta go...
	
Are you okay? Max? Max?
	
I'm sorry, bye.
	
Well, maybe some other time.
	
Please God, Let it be a small one.

Sixteen thirty-five. Second headache in under twenty-four hours. They're getting more frequent now...more painful, too. Drugs don't work, just take the edge off of it. Just gotta wait for the nosebleed. Relief comes from my nose.
	
So I gotta make this drop off in Harlem and on the way down there's these three kids hailing me.

You stopped?
	
I was tight, so...
	
Ahh...
	
Leave me alone.
	
So I drop them off in the Village and they dart.

Oh God...
	
I get out, grab my bat and start running. One of the kids, maybe sixteen, I catch a block later he's cursing at me, calling me a Paki bastard. So I whacked him, right in the head.

Farrouhk!
	
I'm kicking the bastard in the ribs banging his ass, knocking his head against the curb, harder and harder, I fucking lost it. A hot dog guy starts screaming "You're cracking his skull, you're cracking his skull." So they pulled me off of him and calmed me down. Cops said he had it coming to him.
	
is paralyzed with terror.

No! No!
	
Mr. Cohen. Marcy Dawson here again I was just looking over my schedule and I realized I'll be in your neighborhood tomorrow around three.

Who is...
	
Marcy Dawson from Lancet-Percy I'm so anxious to meet you. It will be worth it—for both of us I promise. See you at your house at three, okay?

My house...how do...
	
Oh, don't worry, I got your address from Columbia. So three it is. Looking forward to it.

Damn.
	
Max! How are you7
	
Okay.

Stop thinking, Max, just feel. Use your intuition. It's the only way to get into the flow. 	(Beat) What did you think of Hamlet?
	
I didn't get to it.
	
It's been a month. 	(Knowingly) You haven't taken a single break.

I'm so close, Sol. I'm so close but I just can't grab it.
	
Have you met the new fish my niece bought me? I named her Icarus. After you. My renegade pupil. You fly too high, you'll get burned.
	
The more I see you, the more I see myself thirty years ago. My greatest pupil. Published at 16, Ph.D. at 20.

We'll see.
	
But life isn't just mathematics. I spent forty years looking for patterns in Pi, I found nothing.

You found things...
	
I found things, but not a pattern.

Tuesday, September second, eighteen twelve. If Sol hadn't gotten sick who knows where math would be. He spent years in the numbers of Pi. Searching for meaning, for order.
	
Three point one four...off into infinity and maybe insanity. Somewhere in there he wanted sanity. Sanity like he found in the circles Pi represented. Simple, sane circles. If only the stock market had circles. Some type of sanity. Some type of form, of shape.

Hey, Max, how you doing?
	
Oh, okay.
	
Lenny Meyer. 	(Motioning to the cigarette) I'll put it out. 	(Which be does) So, what do you do?
	
Um, I work with computers ...math.

Really? What type of math?
	
Number theory. Mostly research.

Number theory? No way, I work in theory, too. Not traditional, though... I work with the Torah. Amazing.

Yeah...
	
Yeah. You know Hebrew is all numbers. It's all math.

Hm.
	
Here, look...the ancient Jews used Hebrew as their numerical system. Each letter is a number.

You see...The Hebrew "A," the number 1. The Hebrew "B," Bet, is two. You can take any Hebrew text and turn them into a long string of numbers.
	
The Torah is just a long string of numbers. Some say that it's a long code sent to us from God.

Kind of interesting.
	
Yeah, like take the Hebrew word for, say, the Garden of Eden, Kadem. Kuf, Dalei Mem...Kuf is a hundred. Daled, four Mem, forty. They equal one hundred and forty-four. Then take the tree of knowledge...in the garden, Aat Ha Haim, it equals two hundred and thirty-three. Now you can take that number and...

They're Fibonacci numbers.
	
Huh?
	
The Fibonacci sequence. Italian mathematician, thirteenth century. If you divide a hundred and forty-four into two hundred and thirty-three, it approaches theta.

Theta?
	
The Greek symbol for the golden ratio. The golden spiral.
	
You're right, I never saw that before. That's the series you find in nature. Like the face of a sunflower.

Wherever there's spirals.
	
You see, there's math everywhere.
	
Math everywhere...
	
Everywhere...
	
Oh my God...
	
Simple shapes! Tuesday, September second. Twenty-twenty-two. Sol! Sol! Sol! Shapes in the market. Why not? And they're spirals! Spirals!

A circle spread out overtime. It's open-ended. It has a beginning and it grows and changes through time. If I can find where it fits, if I can spin it and lock it into a group of numbers, then I can calculate the future. Lead into gold. Chaos into order Madness into sanity. Pain into bliss. Perfection.
	
What the...
	
Shit!
	
What the...
	
Wednesday, September third, seven-fifteen. Results: AAR at fourteen and a half—low, very low. ABR at six and a half—jeez. Six and a half, ABR hasn't been beneath twenty in ten years. Conclusion: Simple. There is no pattern. No pattern. Chaos, chaos, all chaos.

Euclid crashed. I lost all my data, my hardware.

Your mainframe?
	
Burnt...
	
What happened?
	
I don't know, first I got these horrible picks. Then Euclid spits out some numbers. Never saw anything like it and then it fries. The whole machine just crashed.
	
You have a printout?
	
Of?
	
The picks, the number?
	
I threw it out.
	
What was the number it spit out?

I don't know, just a long string of digits.

How many?
	
I don't know.
	
What was it, a hundred and fifty, a thousand, two hundred sixteen!? How many?

I don't know. Probably around two hundred. 	(Wondering) Why?
	
I dealt with some bugs back in my Pi days. I was wondering if it was similar to one I ran into.

Have you met Archimedes. The one with the black spot. You see?
	
Yeah.
	
Remember Archimedes of Syracuse? The King asks Archimedes to determine if a present he's received was actually solid gold. Unsolved problem at the time. It tortures the great Greek mathematician for weeks. Insomnia haunts him and he twists and turns on his bed for nights on end. Finally, his equally exhausted wife, she's forced to share a bed with this genius, convinces him to take a bath, to relax. While stepping into the tub he observes the bathwater rise as he enters. Displacement. A way to determine volume. And thus, a way to determine density, weight over volume. And thus, Archimedes solves the problem. He screams "Eureka!"—Greek for "I found it!"—and is so overwhelmed he runs dripping naked through the streets to the King's castle to report his discovery. Now, what's the moral of the story.
	
That a breakthrough will come...

Wrong. The point of the story is the wife. Listen to your wife, she will give you perspective. Meaning, you need a break, Max, you have to take a bath, otherwise you'll get nowhere. There will be no order, only chaos. Go home and take a bath.
	
Hey, excuse me, can I see that?

Six and a half.
	
Fourteen and a half. Oh, my...

My God. My God. Yes! Yes!

Hey, paper, please!
	
Mr. Cohen! Perfect timing.
	
I was just waiting for you. I thought you stood me up, so I was going to head home.
	
Who are you?
	
Oh...Marcy Dawson. From Lancet Percy. We were supposed to meet at three.

I'm sorry, I don't...
	
I can't tell you what a pleasure it is to finally meet you. I've studied your papers for years.
	
I have something you won't be able to say no to. Why don't we take a spin in the limo?

No, no, no, really, I can't.

We're excited by your work. We can't wait to discuss...

On the nose. On the damn nose.
	
Farrouhk?
	
Um, no, it's Max from next door.
	
Max, is everything all right?

Do you have any iodine?
	
Iodine...did you cut yourself?

No. I just need it to stain a slide.

Ah, science, the pursuit of knowledge. One second.

Here we are. What are you examining--	a potato!?

Just something with my computer.

The neighbor's up to his old science...

What neighbor?
	
Next door.
	
Why are you talking to that dork!
	
Shh! I just helped ...
	
Pounds on wall. Hey, dork, leave my girlfriend alone!

Farrouhk!
	
I don't give a shit.
	
Shh! C'mon, Farrouhk.
	
I'll kill the dork. You hear me! I'll kill you. I'll fucking kill you!

Shh! Baby! Come here, baby!
	
I just threw out something. I didn't realize I needed it.

Humph.
	
Just a printout. I, uh, lost my data...

Max! How you doing? Lenny Meyer. 		MAX Oh, hey... 
	
Hey, where you going? You got a few moments to do Tefillin?

I gotta car, we can cruise over to my...

You gotta car?
	
Yeah, right there. That's Ephraim, my friend.

All tight, lets go.
	
Great...
	
Lenny, I don't really want to do...

Do it for me? It means a lot, having someone of your stature performing a mitzvah in my presence. When you told me your name was Max Cohen, I didn't realize you were the Max Cohen. Maximilian Cohen.
	
MAX You know me?
	
0f course, I've followed your research since your Columbia days. It's revolutionary. You've inspired the work we do.
	
I have?
	
Yes, very much so. The only difference is, we're not looking at stocks. We're searching for a pattern in Torah.
	
What kind of pattern?
			
We're not really sure. Our calculations have shown us that there is a number encoded in the text.

What sort of number?
	
We don't know. All we know is that it's two hundred and sixteen digits long.

Don't worry. This one just goes over your head.
		
Two sixteen?
	
Yes. Now we have to say a small prayer, repeat after me.
	
That's it. Wasn't so bad, was it? You feel anything?
	
What is it?
	
It's a prayer about our dedication to our one and only God.
	
No, I mean the number, the two sixteen number? What is it?
	
Oh. We don't know. We just know that it's the most common number encoded in the text. It might be some type of linguistic pattern. If we could figure out what the number is we could maybe answer that.

Tell me more.
	
Max?
	
What's going on, Sol!?
	
Relax, it's early.
	
Now, what's up?
	
What's the two hundred and sixteen number, Sol?

Excuse me?
	
You asked me if I had seen a two hundred and sixteen digit number, right?
	
Oh, you mean the bug. I found it working on Pi.

What do you mean by "found it"?
	
What's this all about, Max?

Well, there's these religious Jews who have...

Religious Jews?
	
Well, you know, Hassidim. I met one in the coffee shop. The guy's a number theorist. The Torah is their data set. The thing is, they're searching for a two hundred and sixteen digit number in the Torah.

Really? What's it mean to them?

They say they don't know, but that's crazy. I mean what are the odds...
	
It's just a coincidence.
	
But hold on, there's something else. You remember those strange picks I got.
	
Yesterday's stock picks?
	
Right. Well, it turns out that they were correct. I hit two picks on the nose. Smack on the nose.

Hmmm.
	
Something's going on, and it has to do with that number. The answer is there.
	
Max, it's a bug.
	
No. it's a pattern. A pattern is in that number

Come with me.
	
Listen to me. The Ancient Japanese considered the Go board to be a microcosm of the universe. Although when it is empty it appears to be simple and ordered, in fact, the possibilities of game play are endless. They say that no two Go games have ever been alike. Just like snowflakes. So, the Go board actually represents an extremely complex and chaotic universe. That is the truth of our world, Max. It can't be easily summed up with math. There is no simple pattern.
	
But as a Go game progresses, the possibilities become smaller and smaller. The board does take on order. Soon, all moves are predictable.

So?
	
So, maybe, even though we're not sophisticated enough to be aware of it, there is an underlying order...a pattern, beneath every Go game. Maybe that pattern is like the pattern in the market, in the Torah. The two sixteen number.

That is insanity, Max.
	
Or maybe it's genius. I have to get that number.

Hold on, you have to slow down. You're losing it, you have to take a breath. Listen to yourself. You're connecting a computer bug I had, a computer bug you might have had, and some religious hogwash. If you want to find the number two sixteen in the world, you'll be able to pull it out of anywhere. Two hundred and sixteen steps from your street comer to your front door. Two hundred and sixteen seconds you spend riding on the elevator. When your mind becomes obsessed with anything, it will filter everything else out and find examples of that thing everywhere. Three hundred and twenty, four hundred and fifty, twenty-three. Whatever! You've chosen two sixteen and you'll find it everywhere in nature. But Max, as soon as you discard scientific rigor, you are no longer a mathematician. You become a numerologist. What you need to do is take a break from your research. You need it. You deserve it Here's a hundred dollars, I want you to take it. If ,you won't take it, borrow it. Either way, take a break. Spend it however you like as long as it falls in the category of vacation. Real world stuff, okay. No math.

Just try it. In a week you'll laugh about this. C'mon, Max. Think about it!
	
Mr. Cohen? Mr. Cohen? Please stop for a second Mr. Cohen?
	
Damn it already! Stop following me. I'm not interested in your money. I'm searching for a way to understand our world. I'm searching for perfection. I don't deal with mediocre materialistic people like you!
	
I'm sorry. I'm very sorry. I admit I've been a bit too aggressive. But all I ask is for five minutes of your time. Here...
	
...a stopwatch. Already ticking. Allow me the four and a half minutes left Let me tell you what I want. Let me tell you what I can offer you. Afterwards, if you don't want to talk to me, then fine, we part as friends and I promise that you will never see me again. That's fair, isn't it?
	
Go.
	
Good. It's funny, even though we have different aims and different goals we're actually incredibly alike. We both seek the same thing—perfection. I know... clearly we're seeking different types of perfection, but that is what makes us perfect candidates for a fruitful partnership. If you let me, I can be your greatest ally. Take the acacia tree...in East Africa. It is the most prevalent plant in all of Kenya because it has managed to secure its niche by defeating its major predator, the giraffe. To accomplish this, the tree has made a contract with a highly specialized red ant. The tree has evolved giant spores which act as housing for the ants In return for shelter, the ants supply defense. When a giraffe starts to eat the tree's leaves, the shaking branch acts like an alarm. The ants charge out and secrete an acid onto the giraffe's tongue. The giraffe learns its lesson and never returns. Without each other, the tree would be picked dry and the ants would have no shade from the brutal African sun Both would die. But with each other, they succeed, they survive, they surpass. They have different aims, different goals but they work together. Max, we would like to establish a mutually benefiting alliance with you.
	
I'm not interested.
	
Allow me to dose.
	
As a sign of good faith we wish to offer you this.

I told you I don't want money.
	
The suitcase isn't filled with fifties or gold or diamonds. Just silicon. A Ming Mecca chip.
	
Ming Mecca. They're not declassified.
	
You're right. They're not. But Lancet-Percy has many friends. Come here, take a look.
	
What do...do...
	
Beautiful, isn't it? You know how rare...are you okay?

Yeah, I got to go.
	
But what about...
	
Let me think about it...
	
What? Mr. Cohen!?
	
Hey!
	
Up, buddy Coney Island, last stop.
	
Your nose.
	
Max, Max, can we do one.
	
Jenna. I can't now, Jenna.
	
Please, Max.
	
I'm working now, later okay?
	
Hello, this is Lenny?
	
Lenny, it's Max Cohen.
	
Max! How are you? You want to come down?

I've been thinking about our conversation earlier.

That's good...
	
I want to help.
	
Excellent.
	
Do you have the Torah in digital form?

Thursday, September fourth, sixteen forty-five. The alchemist awakes. All of my ideas, work and dreams are spinning together It all has to do with spirals. It began with spirals and the answers are thee.

The most I can remember about their significance is from Schneider's class. That bullshit core for majors. Schneider's fascination with mystical geometry made him a bit of a quack...but...then again, look at Kepler. He was really into Pythagoras. The leader of an ancient sect which believed the entire universe could be represented by numbers. Pythagoras' greatest contribution was the golden ratio, which ended up influencing art and science for thousands of years, arguably all the way up to today.
	
The golden ratio, if I recall, is this unique relationship between the length and width of a special rectangle called the golden rectangle.
	
carefully measuring out a golden rectangle. The rectangle fits perfectly over Leonardo Da Vinci's Man.

If you take the width of this rectangle and use it to form a square within the rectangle, the part left over is a rectangle that has the same ratio as the original rectangle. au can continue squaring the rectangle, over and over again, making the rectangles smaller and smaller to infinity.

squaring rectangle after rectangle. Then he draws the golden spiral through the rectangles.

Then, if you connect a curve through these rectangles you get the golden spiral. The Pythagoreans loved this shape because they found it everywhere in nature.
	
It really is amazing. In the sea, on land, in air, our basic building block DNA and even our home.
	
If we're built from spirals, while living within a giant spiral, is it possible that all of human behavior, if it could be quantified, is in the form of a spiral. Then, maybe, extensions of our behavior like the stock market. maybe even the writing of The Torah, is infused with the spiral pattern.

Friday, September fifth. Seven twelve. It's fair to say, I'm stepping out onto a limb. But I'm on the edge and that's where it happens.
	
Three, eight, two.
	
Marcy Dawson.
	
Who's calling?
	
Max Cohen.
	
Hold on.
	
Mr. Cohen? I'm so Happy...

Look what do you want for the chip?
	
You tech guys. I think you know what we want.

No, I don't.
	
C'mon, Mr. Cohen. We can work together We can both profit from this information. We both need each other to get it, so why not work with us?
	
I don't know if I'll find anything useful.

We're willing to take the risk.
	
Okay. First, I want you to call off the surveillance. 

Done. Anything else?
	
Yeah, I'm a very private person. Knock on my door and leave the suitcase outside. I don't want to talk to Anyone.

How do I know you're home? 
	
I'll knock back.
	
Fair enough.
	
The Torah.
	
What is it?
	
In Hebrew characters and numbers.

No, what is it? The two hundred and sixteen digits.

I don't know. 	(Beat) If you get it, maybe we can figure it out. 	(Changing subject) Can you really find it?
	
If the number's in there, I'll find it.

FARROUHK There you go, dork. Been thinking about my girlfriend. Haven't you?
	
Wha...
	
You want to fuck her, don't you?
	
No, no..
	
You calling my girlfriend ugly!? Why don't you want to fuck her? You think she's ugly?
	
No, no, I just. It's that she's your girl...

So you do want to fuck her. You think about fucking her in the mouth, don't you?

No, no, sir, please. I've never touched Devi...I never will.
	
Give the fucking genius a Mars bar. Stay away, or I'll slice off your balls.
	
Damn dork.
	
He's just a bit unique.
	
Unique?! Unique?! He's a dork!
	
MAX Okay.

MAX Friday, September fifth? Lots of work to be done. But I'm close, so close. Today is the day Might have cost me my soul, but down the line I'll work it out. Just keep them in the dark, let them beg. A damn Ming Mecca chip. It's like giving a desperate junkie a syringe filled with junk. Defense uses them to nun nuclear sub reactors. Me? I'm going to dissect the market.

Happy birthday, Euclid.
	
Eighteen thirty. Press return... 

Oh God. Damn religious freaks. The holy Torah...

MAX Ah God...
	
Too much...too soon.
	
Ohh...
	
Stop, please, stop.
	
MAX What the?
	
What is it!? What is it!?
	
Oh...
	
He's alive. His eyes are moving. 
	
Yes, hello?
	
What happened?

You were screaming...
	
Who told you you can put extra locks on the door.

Shhh!
	
The number, the number.
	
You're out, you hear me, you're out. I've had enough of you. Look at all this junk.
	
Four...zero... seven...It's in my head, it's in my head. Somehow I memorized it. I got it up here!

But what is it?
	
Are you okay?

What is this stuff? What does it do?
	
0ut, out, you have to get out. Get out, get out it's my room!
	
Let's go. 
	
That's it, no way. You're the one out of here, mister.

Out! 0utt
	
Are you okay?
	
Out! Get out!
	
Saturday? Dark outside. There was a moment there...when, I don't know...when I didn't exist. What? What?

Max, is that you? Max? 	(Pleading) Max, just talk to me. Things are a bit out of hand down here. People are getting desperate. 	(Suddenly firm) We had a deal, Max. A deal. Talk to us, Max.

Must be an explanation, must be a reason. Must.

Two and a quarter, twelve and an eighth, six and two eighths.
	
I know these...Seven and a quarter. Two and a half ...oh...oh...
	
My God. It's gonna crash, it's gonna fucking crash.
	
You're early. I was just studying our... What did you do to yourself?
	
You lied to me.

I thought you were going to take a break.

You found the two sixteen number in Pi, didn't you? You saw it.
	
I saw it, Sol. I don't know what happened, but I know things. The market is going to crash. It's going to crash. It hasn't yet, but I know it will. I saw it, Sol. What is it, Sol? What's the number?

You have it?
	
It's in my head!
	
Okay, sit down.

I gave up before I pinpointed it. But my guess is that certain problems cause computers to get stuck in a particular loop. The loop leads to meltdown, but right before they crash they...	they become "aware" of their own structure. The computer has a sense of its own silicon nature and it prints out its ingredients.
	
The computer becomes conscious?
	
In some ways...I guess...
	
Studying the pattern made Euclid conscious of itself. Before it died it spit out the number That consciousness is the number.

No, Max, it's only a nasty bug.

A door in front of a cliff. You're driving yourself over the edge. You need to stop.

Stop? How can I stop? I'm this close.

The bug doesn't only destroy computers.
			
What are you saying?
	
Look what it did to your computer. Look what it's doing to you.
	
It's killing you. Leave it unknown.

You were afraid of it. That's why you quit.

Max, I got burnt.
	
C'mon, Sol.
	
It caused my stroke.
	
That's bullshit. It's math, numbers, ideas. Mathematicians are suppose to be out on the edge. You taught me that!
	
Max, there's more than math! There's a whole world...

That's where discoveries happen. We have to go out there alone, all alone, no one can accompany us. We have to search the edge. We have to risk it all. But you ran from it. You're a coward.
	
Max, it's death!
	
You can't tell me what it is. You don't know You've retreated to your goldfish, to your books, to your Go, but you're not satisfied.
	
Get out! Max, get out!
	
I want to understand it. I want to know!

Out!

Who are you working for?

I don't want your wallet. Who sent you?
	
Who the hell sent you!?
	
Wha...I'm sorry...
	
Who are you?!
	
I'm...a...student I've got an assignment for class.

Leave me alone, damn it. Leave me alone.

Marcy? What's up?
	
Let's take a ride, Max.
	
I can't, I got work...

We had a deal! NOW get in the limo!
	
Don't ever hit...
Enough, Max, c'mon out.
	
Leave me alone. I don't know anything.

Hey! Hey! Hey!
	
You're responsible for this.
	
I didn't do anything. I didn't play the market.

But we did.
	
You have to be careful where you throw out your trash.

How could you do that?
	
You gave us faulty information. You gave us the carrot, the right picks, but then you only gave us part of the code.

You selfish, irresponsible cretins. How could you be so stupid!?

C'mon, Max. This isn't a game anymore. We're playing on a global scale. We used your code. Foolish...I admit. But we can fix things if we make some careful picks. Give us the rest of the code so we can set things right.

C'mon! I know who you are. You're not gonna save the world.

Look, Max...
	
My God, what are you doing?
	
Information is the private language of Capital. We tried to establish a symbiotic relationship but if you choose to compete and enter our niche we are forced to comply with the laws of nature.

You can't kill me!
	
C'mon, Max. You don't get it. I don't give a shit about you. I only care about what's in your fucking head. If you won't help us help yourself, then I'll have only one choice. Destroy the competition. I'll take you out of the game. Survival of the fittest, Max. And we've got the gun.

You bastards! You stupid bastards!

Farrouhk!
	
He's sick! He's sick!
	
Max!
	
C'mon...
	
Farrouhk what about Farrouhk!?
	
Stay down!
	
Go back!
	
He's okay, he got in his cab. We've been looking for you.
	
What's going on?
	
Do you have the number?
	
What's going on?
	
Do you have the number?
	
Yeah, I have it!
	
You have it. Where is it? You have it written down?

What is it?
	
What are you doing!? What the hell are you doing!?

We're not joking around, Max? Where's	the number?
	
It's not on me. It's in my head.

You memorized it? Did you give it to them?

Who?
	
Who!? Those Wall Street bastards.

Why do you care?
	
Just answer me!
	
Screw you!
	
Hit him!

You're dealing with something really big now, Max. I don't want to hurt you, so answer me. Did you give it to them?

They've got part of it Now get off me!

Damn it! Damn it! They're using it.

Using what?
	
Shut up!
	
Let go!
	
No, don't!
	
Max, Max. You're okay I'm Rabbi Cohen. Cohen like you. I'm sorry for what Lenny did, he's been reprimanded. It is not our way Are you okay?

Yeah, yeah
	
Everything will be fine, Max. You need to give us the number. Do you have it?

What is it?
	
I told you we don't know
	
You wouldn't be so flipped out if you didn't know. What's happening to me?
	
Give us the number!
	
Screw you!
	
Okay, okay! Lenny, easy! Max, I'll tell you what's going on. Just calm down. 	(Deep breath, then) The Talmud tells us it began two thousand years ago, when the Romans destroyed the second temple.

What are you...
	
Just give me a chance. You'll understand everything if you listen.
	
The Romans also murdered all of our priest-hood—the Cohanim—the Cohens, and with their deaths they destroyed our greatest secret. In the center of the great temple was the holy of holies which was the heart of Jewish life. This was the earthly residence for our God. The one God. It contained the ark of the Tabernacle which stored the original Ten Commandments that God gave to Moses. Only one man could enter this space once a year on the holiest day of the year, Yom Kippur On the Day of Atonement, all of Israel would descend upon Jerusalem to witness the High Cohen's trip into the holy of holies. If the holy man was pure he would reemerge a few moments later and Israel was secured a prosperous year. It meant that we were one yea r closer to the messianic age. Closer to the return of the Garden of Eden. But if he was impure, he would die instantly and it meant that we were doomed. The High Cohen had a single ritual to perform in the holy of holies. He had to intone a single word.

So?
	
That word was the true name of God.
	
Yeah...
	
The true name, which only the Cohanim knew, was two hundred and sixteen letters long.

You're telling me that the number in my head is the name of God!?

Yes...it's The key into the messianic age. As the Romans burned the temple, the Talmud says, the High Cohen walked into the flames. He took his secret to the top of the burning building. The heavens opened up and took the key from the priest's outstretched hand. We've been searching for the key ever since. And you may have found it. Now let us find out.
	
That's what happened. I saw God.

No, no, Max. You're not pure. You can't see God unless you're pure.
	
It's more than God... it s everything. It's math and science and nature... the universe. I saw the Universe's DNA
	
You saw nothing.
	
I saw everything.
	
There's much more. We can unlock the door with the key. It will show God that we are pure again. He will return us to The Garden.
	
Garden? You're not pure. I'm the one who has the number
	
Who do you think you are? You are a vessel from our God. You are carrying a delivery that needs to be made to us.
	
It was given to me. It's part of me. It's changing me.

It's killing you. Because you are impure.

It will kill you!
	
And what will it do to you?

We're pure. Give us the number!

The number is nothing. You know that!

We can use it. We can wield it.

It's just a number. I'm sure you've written down every two hundred sixteen number. You've translated all of them. You've intoned them all. Haven't you? But what's it gotten you? It's not the number! It's the meaning. It's the syntax. It's what's between the numbers. If you could understand you would. But it's not for you! I've got it. I understand it. I'm going to see it! 	(Whispers to Rav Cohen) Rabbi...I was chosen.

Suddenly, it's all there. It all makes sense. I can crack it. I can know it. I know what it is. Sol knows, too. I need to tell him. I need to show him. I need to bring him with me.
	
Can I help you?
	
Sol?
	
Were you a friend?
	
What do you mean?
	
He had a second stroke.
	
Where is he?

Stop it, please!

No. No. I'm ready. I'm ready! Show me!

Three, seven, two...
	
Max. Max! Are you okay!? Oh my God, Max!

Max! Breathe, Max. Breathe!
	
Yes, Max. Listen to me...
	
Breathe, Max! Breathe. Focus.

No, Max. No. Stay with me Max. Stay with me. 
	
Where am I? What is this? This is wrong, Sol. Sol!
	
Sol! You were right Sol! He was right.

That's right Max. That's Right. Breathe. Breathe.

He was right. I want to breathe. Breathe.

Yes, breathe, Max. Breathe...

Max, Max!
	
Can we do one, Max, can we?

How about two hundred and fifty-five times a hundred and eighty-three.
	
I got it! I got it! What's the answer?

I don't know. I really don't know. What is it, Jenna?

Forty-six thousand six hundred and sixty-five.

Oh.
================================================================
Having reached the end of my poor sinner's life... my hair now white... I prepare to leave on this parchment my testimony as to the wondrous and terrible events I witnessed in my youth... towards the end of the year of Our Lord, 1327. May God grant me the wisdom and grace to be the faithful chronicler of the happenings that took place in a remote abbey in the dark north of Italy: an abbey whose name it seems even now pious and prudent to omit. 

to relive the past and revive the feelings of uneasiness that oppressed my heart as we entered the battlements. 

own accord? 

abbot. There's only one authority capable of investigating such matters. ... The holy Inquisition. 

matters to younger men. 

first learn to obey it. Hmm? So, return to the forecourt, get the edificium on your left... enter the quadrangle on you right, you'll find the place you need. Behind the third arch. 

this abbey. 

for the spot in some haste. I noticed, however, that he emerged more slowly with an air of contentment. 

honored to welcome you and your Franciscan brothers to our abbey. 

weeks. The others are due tomorrow. You must be very tired after your long journey. 

has recently been gathered unto God. 

Brother Adelmo was one of our finest illuminators. 

His humor and comic images were almost infamous. But he was said to be a young man. 

Well, that is, I... Brother William... may I speak to you candidly? 

I thought it was an answer to my prayers. "Here," I said, "is a man who has knowledge, both of the human spirit and of the wiles of the evil one." The fact is, Brother Adelmo's death has caused much spiritual unease upon my flock. 

of the Baron of Melk. Please, do continue. 

horribly mutilated, dashed against a rock at the foot of the tower... under a window, which was... How shall I say this? which was... 

spoken of spiritual unease. You would have concluded that he'd fallen. 

opened... nor was the glass shattered... nor is there any access to the roof above. 

natural explanation, your monks suspect the presence of a supernatural force within these walls. 

man such as you, Brother Wiliam. Acute in uncovering and prudent, if necessary, in... covering up before the papal delegates arrive. 

in such matters. 

my dilemma, but... unless I can put the minds of my flock at rest, I will have no alternative but to summon the help of the Inquisition. 

great spiritual leaders of our order. Come. 

others would have him burnt as a heretic. His book on the poverty of the clergy is not favored reading in the papal palaces. So, now he lives in hiding like an outlaw. 

place at once. The devil is roaming this abbey. 

Baskerville. 

William, my son... forgive me. We had lost trace of you for so long. 

to our Virgin for a miracle. 

response. This is my young novice, Adso of Melk. His father has entrusted me with his education and welfare. 

Have you not heard, the devil is hurling beautiful boys out of windows? There was something feminine... something diabolical about the young one who died. He had the eyes of a girl seeking intercourse with the devil. Beware of this place. The beast is still among us. I can sense him now, here... within these very walls. I'm afraid, William... for you, for me... for the outcome of this debate. Oh, my son. The times we live in. But let us not frighten our young friend. 

She's beautiful, is she not? When the female... by nature, so perverse... becomes sublime by holiness, then she can be the noblest vehicle of grace. 

"Beautiful are the breasts that protrude but a little."

Come. Adso, we must not allow ourselves to be influenced by irrational rumors of the Antichrist. Let us instead exercise our brains and try to solve this tantalising conundrum. 

shalt you receive an hundred-fold in paradise." 

philosophers and the faculties of his own remarkable, logical intelligence. Unhappily, my fears were not mere phantoms of my youthful imagination. 

illuminator. 

to the poor. Now, what if it wasn't that tower that he fell from but somewhere over there, and the body rolled all the way down here? Adso? No devil needed anymore. 

No devil needed 

That's where he fell from. He jumped. Adso, are you paying attention? 

Jumped? You mean that he committed suicide? 

at night in the middle of a hailstorm? Certainly not to admire the landscape. 

him. 

with the body? Easier to get rid of it through that sluice gate they pour charity through. 

Suicide? 

abandoned by God? 

would have felt at home? 

no grounds for suspecting the presence of an evil spirit among us... either of this world or another. We praise our Lord that the debate which we are so greatly honored to host... may now proceed without a shadow of fear. We also praise the Almighty for sending us Brother William of Baskerville... whose experience in previous duties, although onerous to him, has been of such service to us here. May serenity and spiritual peace reign once more in our hearts. 

"A monk should keep silent. He should not speak his thoughts... until he is questioned. A monk should not laugh. For it is the fool alone... who lifts up his voice in laughter." 

was the abbot talking about? Were you not always a monk? 

Now, do try to sleep. 

he that increaseth his knowledge increaseth his sorrow also." 

It was a calamity! Father! A tragedy in the pigpen! Come! Come quickly! 

commit suicide. 

to believe your convenient explanation, this second tragedy might've been prevented. 

took his own life. Now, whether- 

with it, I intend to find. 

trumpet... the sea became blood. And behold... here is blood!" 

will fall in fountains of water."

diarrhea. And as for onions, administered in small quantities, warm and moist, they help prolong the male erection... in those who have not taken our vows, naturally. 

you apply arsenic, Brother Severinus? 

for nervous disorders... 

entirely devoted to the works of Aristotle. 

young Adelmo? 

scriptorium. But in a brotherly way, you understand? Not like... I mean, flesh can be tempted according to nature... or against nature. And they were not of the latter disposition.... if you ascertain my meaning. 

Watch out for the 'dracul' who cometh 'in futurum' to gnaw on your anima! Death is supreme. You contemplate the apocalypse? There, we have the devil. Ugly 'con' Salvatore, eh? My little brother, 'penitenziagite.' 

I don't have a good rhetoric. But men must do "penitence." I'm a monk. Saint Benedict! Saint Benedict! 

mentioning? 

once a heretic. "Penitenziagite" was the rallying cry of the Dolcinites. 

be poor. So they slaughtered the rich. You see, Adso... the step between ecstatic vision and sinful frenzy... is all too brief. 

translator? 

were more to the taste of the Dolcinites. Hardly a specialist of Aristotle. But, yes, you're right. We must keep an open mind. We are very fortunate to have such snowy ground here. It's often the parchment on which the criminal unwillingly writes his autograph. 

Now, what do you read from these footprints here? 

master. 

the weight of another man. Let us commit the autograph of this sole to our memory. 

in this direction. 

the possibility that the man was walking backwards, dragging the body thus... Hence, the furrows created by the heels. Now, where did the erudite Greek translator meet the anonymous author of his death? 

Perhaps you will permit us to examine the work of the two unfortunates... that were so distressingly gathered unto God. Your request is most unusual. 

A donkey teaching the scriptures to the bishops. The pope is a fox. The abbot is a monkey. He really had a daring talent for comic images. 

"A monk should not laugh. Only fool lifts up his voice in laughter." I trust my words didn't offend you, Brother William... but I heard the persons laughing at laughable things. You Franciscans, however, belong to an order where merriment is viewed with indulgence. 

disposed to laughter. 

the lineaments of the face and makes men look like monkeys.

Laughter is particular to man. 

that He did. 

say that He did not. Even the saints have been known to employ comedy to ridicule the enemies of the faith. For example, when the pagans plunged St. Maurus into the boiling water, he complained that his bath was too cold. The Sultan put his hand in, scalded it. 

play childish tricks. He restrains his cries and suffers for the truth. 

of Poetics to comedy as an instrument of truth. 

many centuries. 

Because Providence doesn't want futile things glorified. 

grief. Yet you would intrude on our sorrow with idle banter! 

My remarks were truly out of place. 

Which was the Greek translator's desk? 

that visit? 

were on the scryptorium shelves? All those scriveners, copyists, translators, researchers, thinkers... But where are the multitude of books that they need for their work? And for which this abbey is famed. Where are the books? 

that whenever you ask me a question, you already have the answer. Do you know where the books are? 

But I'll wager my faith that that tower contains something other than air. 

closed as we came in? 

Master! Master, quick! I have him! 

Please, don't talk to the abbot about his past. He's innocent of the deaths in this abbey. I swear it. 

is some information. 

quickly dismissed my suspicions of the heretical hunchback... and why it was so urgent that we visit the tower. I assumed he could not resist the temptation to penetrate the library and look at the books. 

a book all alone, puts out a candle) 

bolted from the inside.

entrance. 

Let's see what the moon-faced assistant librarian was trying to conceal from us this morning, shall we? 

Tiny Greek letters, perhaps written by an ant with inky feet. "Use vulgar people take pleasure from their defects... " Ah, yes. Written with lemon juice. "Sagittarius... Sun... Mercury... Scorpion." It's some zodiacal code giving directions, but to where? 

Who's there? Hey! Who's there? Who's there? 

They were on that book. 

I know you are here. I can smell you. What's the matter with you, huh? Are you afraid of me? I'll find you. 

Who was this creature that rose like the dawn... was bewitching as the moon, radiant as the sun... terrible as an army poised for battle? 

This is where you catch them? 

Bigger, eh? 

tell me this. 

So Adelmo gave the parchment to Berengar? 

To the translo... the transla... 

Master! In here, quick! I found another one. 

Have you ever met anyone with a rib cage large enough to accommodate a heart of those dimensions? 

One of the monks probably gave it to that peasant girl in exchange for her favors. 

He must have been a very ugly monk. 

Why ugly? 

would no doubt have blessed him with her carnal favors for nothing. In any event, whatever happened in this dreadful kitchen has no bearing on our investigations. The hunchback convinced me that Brother Berengar, the assistant librarian, is the key to the whole enigma. What did you say? 

There's something I must tell you. 

a friend. 

Are you not confusing love with lust? 

her from her poverty. 

problems. 

love above all other virtues? 

of God! 

little. But the scriptures are very clear. 

Proverbs warns us, "Woman takes possession of a man's precious soul." While Ecclesiastics tells us, "More bitter than death is woman." 

of your experience. But I find it difficult to convince myself... that God would have introduced such a foul being into creation... without endowing her with some virtues. Hm? How peaceful life would be without love, Adso. How safe. How tranquil. .. and how dull. 

our steps to this refuge of spiritual peace because you wish for reconciliation as much as we Franciscans. Let us go, brothers. Thy will be done, oh Lord. Amen. Amen. 

Brother Berengar? He's probably hiding somewhere with the book and my magnifying glasses. 

for your assistant, Brother Berengar. Is he here? 

him? 

May I do so? 

one is permitted to enter the abbey library other than myself and my assistant.

Maybe we'll find him in water. 

said. The book of Revelation. 

It looks more like a sparrow. 

and to your fellow Franciscan delegates. 

This is Cuthbert of Winchester, one of our most esteemed Franciscan guests. Come, Your Grace. We have a very urgent matter to discuss. 

convinced that the devil is at work within these walls. 

is everyone's desire to see him at work. 

to us all.

the entire matter is resolved. 

Pray God that you do not abuse it. 

I was right. 

And I have much to tell. Just as soon as he and I have examined this corpse. 

alleviate pain. 

in many ways. 

the abbey here? 

He did not write with his tongue, I presume. 

Some random notes from the book he was reading just before he died. Do you see how the calligraphy changes? From this point on, he was dying. And what, my lord, do you conclude from that? 

by your finest illuminator, Brother Adelmo who possessed this parchment before Venantius. And how do we know that? Because those random notes overrun Adelmo's blue smudge, and not vice-versa. 

in a terrifying mystery. Yet, I detect nothing, in your obscure dissertation... that sheds any light upon it. 

Someone was at great pains to conceal a secret of the first magnitude. Now, the calligraphy is, without question, left-handed. And the only left-handed member of your community is... or rather was... Brother Berengar, the assistant librarian. Now, what kind of secret knowledge would he have been privy to? 

tell me. 

dangerous books. 

Everyone here knew of the assistant librarian's passion for handsome boys. When the beautiful Adelmo wanted to read such a forbidden book, Berengar offered him the key to its whereabouts... enciphered on that parchment in exchange for unnatural caresses. 

Berengar's lustful advances. But afterwards, wracked by remorse, he wandered weeping and desperate in the graveyard, where he met the Greek translator. 

who saw Adelmo giving this parchment to Venantius... then running towards the small tower and hurling himself out of the window. The night of my arrival, while Berengar punished his sinful flesh... Venantius, helped by the coded instructions on the parchment made his way into the forbidden library and found the book. He took it back to his desk in the scriptorium and began to read it. After scribbling down those mysterious quotations he died with a black stain on his finger. The assistant librarian discovered the body and dragged it down to the pigpens to avert suspicion falling on him. But he left his autograph behind. The book remained on the translator's desk. Berengar returned there last night and read it. Soon after, overcome by some agonizing pain, he tried to take a soothing bath with lime leaves and drowned. He, too, had a blackened finger. All three died because of a book which kills... or for which men will kill. I therefore urge you to grant me access to the library. 

By idolizing reason you failed to see what is obvious to everyone in this abbey. 

The papal delegation's arrived. Bernardo Gui. 

We are mindful of your efforts but I should now ask you to refrain from further investigations. Happily, there will be someone arriving with the papal delegation who is well-versed in the wiles of the evil one. A man, I believe, you know only too well. Bernardo Gui... of the Inquisition. 

abbey for you! Michele wishes to speak with you at once. 

Ubertino must be moved to a place of safety. 

that concerns us, William. 

irrelevant investigations.

or anyone else, William of Baskerville must always prove himself right. 

intellectual pride that brought you into conflict with Bernardo before? 

Not even the Emperor won't be able to save you if you tangle with Bernardo again. 

that our union had given me... but my soul could not forget her. And now, now that I saw her in the midst of her poverty and squalor, I praised God in my heart that I was a Franciscan. I wanted her to know that I did not belong to this rapacious abbey but to an order dedicated to lifting her people out of their physical destitution, and spiritual depravation. 

You are mad and arrogant... but I love you and shall never cease to pray for you. (to Adso) Goodbye, dear child. Try not to learn too many bad examples from your master. He thinks too much. Relying always on the deductions of his head... instead of trusting in the prophetic capacities... of his heart. Learn to mortify your intelligence. Weep over the wounds of our Lord! Oh, and do throw away those books! 

envy. 

friends. The next will fall from the sky, and then will come a thousand scorpions. 

Those are the foundations of the tower. But how to reach the library? 

The rats love parchment even more than scholars do. Let's follow him. 166. Bolted scriptorium door. 167, 168, 169, 170. ... 317, 318.... I knew it. Adso! I knew it! Adso, do you realize... we're in one of the greatest libraries in the whole of Christendom? Wow! 

looking for? 

And this is the version annotated by Umberto de Bologna. How many more rooms, huh? How many more books? No one should be forbidden to consult these books freely. 

precious, too fragile. 

It's because they often contain a wisdom different from ours... and ideas that could encourage us to doubt the infallibility of the word of God. 

Master? Wait for me! 

in a labyrinth. Are you still there? 

You see, Adso, that is the charm of a labyrinth. Adso, stay calm. Open a book... and read it aloud. Leave the room you're in... and keep turning left. 

"Love does not originate as an illness but is transformed into it when it becomes obsessive thoughts." "The Muslim theologian Ahmed Hasim states that the lovesick person does not want to be healed and his dreams cause irregular breathing and quicken the pulse." "He identifies amorous melancholia with lycanthropy, a disease that induces wolf-like behavior in its victims." "The lover's outer appearance begins to change. Soon his eyesight fails, his lips shrivel... and his face becomes covered with pustules and scabs." "Marks resembling the bites of a dog appear on his face... and he ends his days by prowling graveyards... at night like a wolf." Master? Master, I can see a lantern. 

almost there. 

of the Greek translator correctly... You did not think me so foolish as to surrender the parchment to the abbot without making a copy, right? "Manus supra idolum, age primum et septimus de quatuor" is what? 

the first and the seventh of four' 

teaching theology in Paris. 

... Do you hear that? 

me for the moment. Now, let me see... to find your way out of a labyrinth... when you come to a fork, you mark it with an arrow... No, no, no. No. 

If there are arrows at the forks... 

Your classical education serves us well. 

Give me! 

Then, you have the love. Spit, please. 

Spit over there. 

Lucifer, be at my service. 

Aah! Aah! It's burning! 

Search the creature. 

the presence of the evil one in your abbey and I have already found it. How many times have I seen these objects of devil worship: the black cockerel and the black cat? 

not the devil.

the trial he presided over... in which a woman confessed to having intercourse with a demon in the form of a black cat. 

on my past experiences to formulate your conclusions, Lord Bernardo. 

irrefutable evidence. A witch! A seduced monk! Satanic rites! Tomorrow... we shall endeavor to learn if these events are connected with the even graver mystery that afflicts your abbey. Lock them up that we may all sleep safely tonight. 

to be said. 

when it comes to books and ideas. 

Bernardo Gui has spoken. She is a witch. 

I also know that anyone who disputes the verdict of an inquisitor is guilty of heresy. 

I, too, was an inquisitor, but in the early days, when the Inquisition strove to guide, not to punish. And once I had to preside at the trial of a man... whose only crime was to have translated a Greek book that conflicted with the holy scriptures. Bernardo Gui wanted to condemn him as heretic. I acquitted the man. Then Gui accused me of heresy for having defended him. I appealed to the pope. I was put in prison... tortured... and I recanted. 

And I'm still alive. 

cause me as much pain as you. But you can put an end to them before we even begin. Open the gates of your heart. Search the depths of your soul. Search! 

is the heretic responsible for these murders? 

I don't know anything! Stupid. Stupid. Me don't know anything. 

the girl or for myself? I did not know. With the dawn, came the envoys of the pope: our adversaries in the forthcoming debate. But it meant so little to me now. 

at last we meet for this long-awaited debate. We have all journeyed great distances in order to put an end to the dispute that has so gravely impaired the unity of our Holy Mother Church. Good people throughout Christendom are directing their gazes at these venerable walls anxiously awaiting our answer to the vexed question: "Did Christ, or did He not, own the clothes that He wore?" 

Our Holy Father, the pope, has authorized me and these, his faithful servants, to speak on his behalf. The question is not whether Christ was poor... but whether the Church should be poor! You Franciscans wish to see the clergy renounce its possessions... and surrender its richness... the abbeys dissipate their sacred treasures and hand over their fertile acres to the serfs. 

I found the book. I found it in the dispensary. A book in Greek was behind one of my jars. 

Return, lock yourself inside. I'll be there just as soon as I can. 

resources needed to combat unbelievers and wage war on the infidel. You forget that even the greatest monument to our Lord is but a pale reflection of His infinite Majesty and glory... far outstripping the church... 

Salvatore confessed to his radical past, and yours. You have but little time to escape the flames. 

on Earth"? Answer that, your Eminence! 

The gospels state categorically that Christ possessed a purse. 

The Lord commanded his disciples on no less than seven occasions: "Carry neither gold..." 

A matter has occurred of the utmost gravity. 

I swear, I didn't kill him! I was at the granary taking the inventory! I never killed anyone! I swear it! 

escape. 

charges. I see now that I was correct. Had someone else not chosen to look in the wrong direction... several men of God might still be with us. 

from their defects." Please, dear boy. I am trying to think! 

heart... and we might make some progress. 

Couldn't you at least show a little pity? 

But pity won't save her from the fire. 

by their vow of obedience and, on pain of excommunication... to aid the inquisitor in his painful struggle against heresy. To sit with me on this tribunal... and to share the burden of the verdict... I will require the counsel of two fellow judges. My lord Abbot... and... Brother William of Baskerville. 

Salvatore, will you repeat your confession of last night? That you and your accomplice, Remigio de Varagine... were members of the heretical Dolcinites? 

Remigio de Varagine, do you deny the confession of your accomplice? 

For the twelve years I lived here... I did nothing but stuff my belly... shag my wick... and squeeze the hungry peasants for tithes. But now you have given me the strength to remember what I once believed in with all my heart, and for that I thank you. 

burned the property of the church? 

stole it from in the first place. 

bishops and priests? 

had half the chance! 

prayer. I know that my sin was very great, but I beg of you to not let her suffer for my wrongdoing. Blessed Mother, many years ago you granted a miracle by saving my master. Will you not do the same for this girl? My master says that the simple folk always pay for all. But, please, Holy Mother, do not let it be so. 

monk and practiced her diabolical ritual within this hallowed place. Guilty is Salvatore... who has confessed to his heretical past and was caught in flagrante delicto with a witch!Guilty is Remigio de Varagine... who, in addition to unrepentant of his former heresies, was caught attempting to escape after murdering Severinus. 

or anyone else in this abbey! 

sentence, My lord abbot. 

can find no reason to contest the just sentence of the Holy Inquisition. 

in his youth misinterpreted the message of the Ggspels. And he is guilty of having confused the love of poverty with the blind destruction of wealth and property. But, my lord abbot, he is innocent of the crimes that have bathed your abbey in blood. For brother Remigio cannot read Greek. And this entire mystery hinges on the theft and possession of a book written in Greek and hidden in some secret part of the library. 

been disputed by Brother William, we are obliged to extract the prisoner's confession to murder. Take him to the forge and show him the instruments. 

torture me. I can't live through it, not like Salvatore. 

I was inspired by the devil. I am inspired by the devil! Adrammelech, Lucifer, I summon you, lords of hell! Alastor! Azazel! 

infected sheep must now be consigned to the purifying flame. 

willl not put a stop to the crimes being committed in this abbey! Other monks will meet their deaths here... and they also will have black fingers and black tongues! 

We Franciscans are as appalled as you by Brother William's outburst. 

protect heretics and lead to murder. The debate is concluded. 

has relapsed into the errors of which he was formerly purged. Having sought yet again to shield a heretic from just punishment by the Inquisition, he will accompany me to Avignon for confirmation of my sentence by His Holiness Pope John. 

that Bernardo Gui was wrong! But the Antichrist was victorious once more... and nothing seemed to be able to hinder him further. 

let the flames purify each of us in his own heart. Let us return to what was and ever should be the office of this abbey. The preservation of knowledge. "Preservation," I say, not "search for." Because there is no progress in the history of knowledge... merely a continuous and sublime recapitulation. Let us now praise the Almighty that the bloody-eyed and cloven-hoofed Antichrist has been purged from our sacred precincts and our monastery has returned to peace. 

He told me. 

Brother William foretold! 

Will it never end? Malachia. 

was right. He said... 

Just as I, too, would have known, had I been the murderer! Find William of Baskerville! 

mirror! 

letters of the word "four." 

The inscription above the mirror? 

"eidolon," as in the Greek. Meaning "image" or "reflection." Our own reflection! 

Good evening, Venerable Jorge. 

days past, William. 

have reached it ahead of us. 

your arrival at this abbey... but the short route through the labyrinth is not among them. So now, what is it that you want? 

was never written. A book entirely devoted to comedy, which you hate as much as you hate laughter. I want to see what is probably the sole surviving copy of the second book of the Poetics of Aristotle. 

would have been! 

Close, now! 

stimulates all the like and ridiculous by using vulgar persons and taking pleasure from their defects." 

to the boy. I'm sure he can read it. 

turn your poisoned pages, not without the protection of a glove, such as I am wearing. 

Push! Stay, stay! Venerable brother, there are many books that speak of comedy. Why does this one fill you with such fear? 

and embrace Jesus Christ as your Lord and Savior? 

the devil and embrace Jesus... 

It's better die fast than to spend the rest of life in prison! The devil I renounce is you, Bernardo Gui! 

Do you renounce the devil and embrace Jesus Christ as your lord and Savior? 

there can be no faith. Because without fear of the devil, there is no more need of God. 

eliminating that book. 

the common man's recreation... but what would happen if, because of this book learned men were to pronounce it permissible to laugh at everything? Can we laugh at God? The world would relapse into chaos. Therefore, I seal that which was not to be said and the tomb I become. 

the arch!

Leave this place at once! I insist! 

Burn the witch! 

Come! 

No! You're not going to leave! All of this your wrong doing! My master found out the murderer! 

Help me! Quick! Help me! No. No, no! 

for I learned from my master much that was wise and good and true. When at last we parted company, he presented me with his eyeglasses. I was still young, he said, but someday they would serve me well. And, in fact, I am wearing them now on my nose as I write these lines. Then he embraced fondly, like a father, and sent me on my way. I never saw him again, and know not what became of him... but I pray always that God received his soul and forgave the many little vanities to which he was driven by his intellectual pride. And yet, now that I am an old, old man, I must confess that of all the faces that appear to me out of the past... the one I see most clearly is that of the girl... of whom I've never ceased to dream these many long years. She was the only earthly love of my life... yet I never knew nor ever learned ... her name.

